{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff31507\deff0\stshfdbch31506\stshfloch31506\stshfhich31506\stshfbi31507\deflang1033\deflangfe1033\themelang1033\themelangfe0\themelangcs0{\fonttbl{\f2\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}{\f2\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}
{\f39\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020f0502020204030204}Calibri;}{\f40\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 020b0609020204030204}Consolas;}{\flomajor\f31500\fbidi \froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}
{\fdbmajor\f31501\fbidi \froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\fhimajor\f31502\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020f0302020204030204}Calibri Light;}
{\fbimajor\f31503\fbidi \froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\flominor\f31504\fbidi \froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}
{\fdbminor\f31505\fbidi \froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\fhiminor\f31506\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020f0502020204030204}Calibri;}
{\fbiminor\f31507\fbidi \froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f61\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset238\fprq1 Courier New CE;}{\f62\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset204\fprq1 Courier New Cyr;}
{\f64\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset161\fprq1 Courier New Greek;}{\f65\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset162\fprq1 Courier New Tur;}{\f66\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset177\fprq1 Courier New (Hebrew);}{\f67\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset178\fprq1 Courier New (Arabic);}
{\f68\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset186\fprq1 Courier New Baltic;}{\f69\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset163\fprq1 Courier New (Vietnamese);}{\f61\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset238\fprq1 Courier New CE;}{\f62\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset204\fprq1 Courier New Cyr;}
{\f64\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset161\fprq1 Courier New Greek;}{\f65\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset162\fprq1 Courier New Tur;}{\f66\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset177\fprq1 Courier New (Hebrew);}{\f67\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset178\fprq1 Courier New (Arabic);}
{\f68\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset186\fprq1 Courier New Baltic;}{\f69\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset163\fprq1 Courier New (Vietnamese);}{\f431\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Calibri CE;}{\f432\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Calibri Cyr;}
{\f434\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Calibri Greek;}{\f435\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Calibri Tur;}{\f436\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Calibri (Hebrew);}{\f437\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Calibri (Arabic);}
{\f438\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Calibri Baltic;}{\f439\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Calibri (Vietnamese);}{\f441\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset238\fprq1 Consolas CE;}{\f442\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset204\fprq1 Consolas Cyr;}
{\f444\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset161\fprq1 Consolas Greek;}{\f445\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset162\fprq1 Consolas Tur;}{\f448\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset186\fprq1 Consolas Baltic;}{\f449\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset163\fprq1 Consolas (Vietnamese);}
{\flomajor\f31508\fbidi \froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\flomajor\f31509\fbidi \froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\flomajor\f31511\fbidi \froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\flomajor\f31512\fbidi \froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\flomajor\f31513\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\flomajor\f31514\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}
{\flomajor\f31515\fbidi \froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\flomajor\f31516\fbidi \froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\fdbmajor\f31518\fbidi \froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\fdbmajor\f31519\fbidi \froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\fdbmajor\f31521\fbidi \froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\fdbmajor\f31522\fbidi \froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}
{\fdbmajor\f31523\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\fdbmajor\f31524\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\fdbmajor\f31525\fbidi \froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\fdbmajor\f31526\fbidi \froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\fhimajor\f31528\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Calibri Light CE;}{\fhimajor\f31529\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Calibri Light Cyr;}
{\fhimajor\f31531\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Calibri Light Greek;}{\fhimajor\f31532\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Calibri Light Tur;}{\fhimajor\f31533\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Calibri Light (Hebrew);}
{\fhimajor\f31534\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Calibri Light (Arabic);}{\fhimajor\f31535\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Calibri Light Baltic;}{\fhimajor\f31536\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Calibri Light (Vietnamese);}
{\fbimajor\f31538\fbidi \froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\fbimajor\f31539\fbidi \froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\fbimajor\f31541\fbidi \froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\fbimajor\f31542\fbidi \froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\fbimajor\f31543\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\fbimajor\f31544\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}
{\fbimajor\f31545\fbidi \froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\fbimajor\f31546\fbidi \froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\flominor\f31548\fbidi \froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\flominor\f31549\fbidi \froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\flominor\f31551\fbidi \froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\flominor\f31552\fbidi \froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}
{\flominor\f31553\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\flominor\f31554\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\flominor\f31555\fbidi \froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\flominor\f31556\fbidi \froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\fdbminor\f31558\fbidi \froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\fdbminor\f31559\fbidi \froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}
{\fdbminor\f31561\fbidi \froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\fdbminor\f31562\fbidi \froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\fdbminor\f31563\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\fdbminor\f31564\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\fdbminor\f31565\fbidi \froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\fdbminor\f31566\fbidi \froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}
{\fhiminor\f31568\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Calibri CE;}{\fhiminor\f31569\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Calibri Cyr;}{\fhiminor\f31571\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Calibri Greek;}{\fhiminor\f31572\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Calibri Tur;}
{\fhiminor\f31573\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Calibri (Hebrew);}{\fhiminor\f31574\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Calibri (Arabic);}{\fhiminor\f31575\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Calibri Baltic;}
{\fhiminor\f31576\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Calibri (Vietnamese);}{\fbiminor\f31578\fbidi \froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\fbiminor\f31579\fbidi \froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}
{\fbiminor\f31581\fbidi \froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\fbiminor\f31582\fbidi \froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\fbiminor\f31583\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\fbiminor\f31584\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\fbiminor\f31585\fbidi \froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\fbiminor\f31586\fbidi \froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}
{\f41\fbidi \froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f42\fbidi \froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f45\fbidi \froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}
{\f46\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f47\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f48\fbidi \froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f49\fbidi \froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\*\defchp \f31506\fs22 }{\*\defpap 
\ql \li0\ri0\sa160\sl259\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 }\noqfpromote {\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\sa160\sl259\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 
\af31507\afs22\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \f31506\fs22\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 \sqformat \spriority0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden \sunhideused \spriority1 Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv \ql \li0\ri0\sa160\sl259\slmult1
\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af31507\afs22\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \f31506\fs22\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext11 \ssemihidden \sunhideused Normal Table;}{
\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af31507\afs21\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \f40\fs21\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 \slink16 \sunhideused Plain Text;}
{\*\cs16 \additive \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs21 \ltrch\fcs0 \f40\fs21 \sbasedon10 \slink15 \slocked Plain Text Char;}}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\mmathPr\mmathFont34\mbrkBin0\mbrkBinSub0\msmallFrac0\mdispDef1\mlMargin0\mrMargin0\mdefJc1\mwrapIndent1440\mintLim0\mnaryLim1}{\info
{\author word}{\operator word}{\creatim\yr2018\mo6\dy16\hr11\min10}{\revtim\yr2018\mo6\dy16\hr11\min10}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords28077}{\nofchars160039}{\nofcharsws187741}{\vern93}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office
/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1501\margr1502\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\trackmoves0\trackformatting1\donotembedsysfont1\relyonvml0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\makebackup
\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin360\dgvorigin360\dghshow1\dgvshow1
\jexpand\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nobrkwrptbl\snaptogridincell\allowfieldendsel\wrppunct\asianbrkrule
\newtblstyruls\nogrowautofit\usenormstyforlist\noindnmbrts\felnbrelev\nocxsptable\indrlsweleven\noafcnsttbl\afelev\utinl\hwelev\spltpgpar\notcvasp\notbrkcnstfrctbl\notvatxbx\krnprsnet\cachedcolbal \nouicompat \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 2450}
\nofeaturethrottle1\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af31507\afs21\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \f40\fs21\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af2 \ltrch\fcs0 \f2 PREFACE
\par 
\par 
\par This book belongs to the most rare of men. Perhaps not one of them is
\par yet alive. It is possible that they may be among those who understand my
\par "Zarathustra": how _could_ I confound myself with those who are now
\par sprouting ears?--First the day after tomorrow must come for me. Some men
\par are born posthumously.
\par 
\par The conditions under which any one understands me, and _necessarily_
\par understands me--I know them only too well. Even to endure my
\par seriousness, my passion, he must carry intellectual integrity to the
\par verge of hardness. He must be accustomed to living on mountain tops--and
\par to looking upon the wretched gabble of politics and nationalism as
\par _beneath_ him. He must have become indifferent; he must never ask of the
\par truth whether it brings profit to him or a fatality to him.... He must
\par have an inclination, born of strength, for questions that no one has the
\par courage for; the courage for the _forbidden_; predestination for the
\par labyrinth. The experience of seven solitudes. New ears for new music.
\par New eyes for what is most distant. A new conscience for truths that have
\par hitherto remained unheard. _And_ the will to economize in the grand
\par manner--to hold together his strength, his enthusiasm.... Reverence for
\par self; love of self; absolute freedom of self....
\par 
\par Very well, then! of that sort only are my readers, my true readers, my
\par readers foreordained: of what account are the _rest_?--The rest are
\par merely humanity.--One must make one's self superior to humanity, in
\par power, in _loftiness_ of soul,--in contempt.
\par 
\par                         FRIEDRICH W. NIETZSCHE.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par THE ANTICHRIST
\par 
\par 
\par 1.
\par 
\par --Let us look each other in the face. We are Hyperboreans--we know well
\par enough how remote our place is. "Neither by land nor by water will you
\par find the road to the Hyperboreans": even Pindar,[1] in his day, knew
\par _that_ much about us. Beyond the North, beyond the ice, beyond
\par _death_--_our_ life, _our_ happiness.... We have discovered that
\par happiness; we know the way; we got our knowledge of it from thousands of
\par years in the labyrinth. Who _else_ has found it?--The man of today?--"I
\par don't know either the way out or the way in; I am whatever doesn't know
\par either the way out or the way in"--so sighs the man of today.... _This_
\par is the sort of modernity that made us ill,--we sickened on lazy peace,
\par cowardly compromise, the whole virtuous dirtiness of the modern Yea and
\par Nay. This tolerance and _largeur_ of the heart that "forgives"
\par everything because it "understands" everything is a sirocco to us.
\par Rather live amid the ice than among modern virtues and other such
\par south-winds!... We were brave enough; we spared neither ourselves nor
\par others; but we were a long time finding out _where_ to direct our
\par courage. We grew dismal; they called us fatalists. _Our_ fate--it was
\par the fulness, the tension, the _storing up_ of powers. We thirsted for
\par the lightnings and great deeds; we kept as far as possible from the
\par happiness of the weakling, from "resignation"... There was thunder in
\par our air; nature, as we embodied it, became overcast--_for we had not yet
\par found the way_. The formula of our happiness: a Yea, a Nay, a straight
\par line, a _goal_....
\par 
\par [1] _Cf._ the tenth Pythian ode. See also the fourth book of Herodotus.
\par The Hyperboreans were a mythical people beyond the Rhipaean mountains,
\par in the far North. They enjoyed unbroken happiness and perpetual youth.
\par 
\par 
\par 2.
\par 
\par What is good?--Whatever augments the feeling of power, the will to
\par power, power itself, in man.
\par 
\par What is evil?--Whatever springs from weakness.
\par 
\par What is happiness?--The feeling that power _increases_--that resistance
\par is overcome.
\par 
\par Not contentment, but more power; _not_ peace at any price, but war;
\par _not_ virtue, but efficiency (virtue in the Renaissance sense, _virtu_,
\par virtue free of moral acid).
\par 
\par The weak and the botched shall perish: first principle of _our_ charity.
\par And one should help them to it.
\par 
\par What is more harmful than any vice?--Practical sympathy for the botched
\par and the weak--Christianity....
\par 
\par 
\par 3.
\par 
\par The problem that I set here is not what shall replace mankind in the
\par order of living creatures (--man is an end--): but what type of man must
\par be _bred_, must be _willed_, as being the most valuable, the most worthy
\par of life, the most secure guarantee of the future.
\par 
\par This more valuable type has appeared often enough in the past: but
\par always as a happy accident, as an exception, never as deliberately
\par _willed_. Very often it has been precisely the most feared; hitherto it
\par has been almost _the_ terror of terrors;--and out of that terror the
\par contrary type has been willed, cultivated and _attained_: the domestic
\par animal, the herd animal, the sick brute-man--the Christian....
\par 
\par 
\par 4.
\par 
\par Mankind surely does _not_ represent an evolution toward a better or
\par stronger or higher level, as progress is now understood. This "progress"
\par is merely a modern idea, which is to say, a false idea. The European of
\par today, in his essential worth, falls far below the European of the
\par Renaissance; the process of evolution does _not_ necessarily mean
\par elevation, enhancement, strengthening.
\par 
\par True enough, it succeeds in isolated and individual cases in various
\par parts of the earth and under the most widely different cultures, and in
\par these cases a _higher_ type certainly manifests itself; something which,
\par compared to mankind in the mass, appears as a sort of superman. Such
\par happy strokes of high success have always been possible, and will remain
\par possible, perhaps, for all time to come. Even whole races, tribes and
\par nations may occasionally represent such lucky accidents.
\par 
\par 
\par 5.
\par 
\par We should not deck out and embellish Christianity: it has waged a war to
\par the death against this _higher_ type of man, it has put all the deepest
\par instincts of this type under its ban, it has developed its concept of
\par evil, of the Evil One himself, out of these instincts--the strong man as
\par the typical reprobate, the "outcast among men." Christianity has taken
\par the part of all the weak, the low, the botched; it has made an ideal out
\par of _antagonism_ to all the self-preservative instincts of sound life; it
\par has corrupted even the faculties of those natures that are
\par intellectually most vigorous, by representing the highest intellectual
\par values as sinful, as misleading, as full of temptation. The most
\par lamentable example: the corruption of Pascal, who believed that his
\par intellect had been destroyed by original sin, whereas it was actually
\par destroyed by Christianity!--
\par 
\par 
\par 6.
\par 
\par It is a painful and tragic spectacle that rises before me: I have drawn
\par back the curtain from the _rottenness_ of man. This word, in my mouth,
\par is at least free from one suspicion: that it involves a moral accusation
\par against humanity. It is used--and I wish to emphasize the fact
\par again--without any moral significance: and this is so far true that the
\par rottenness I speak of is most apparent to me precisely in those quarters
\par where there has been most aspiration, hitherto, toward "virtue" and
\par "godliness." As you probably surmise, I understand rottenness in the
\par sense of _d\'e9cadence_: my argument is that all the values on which
\par mankind now fixes its highest aspirations are _d\'e9cadence_-values.
\par 
\par I call an animal, a species, an individual corrupt, when it loses its
\par instincts, when it chooses, when it _prefers_, what is injurious to it.
\par A history of the "higher feelings," the "ideals of humanity"--and it is
\par possible that I'll have to write it--would almost explain why man is so
\par degenerate. Life itself appears to me as an instinct for growth, for
\par survival, for the accumulation of forces, for _power_: whenever the will
\par to power fails there is disaster. My contention is that all the highest
\par values of humanity have been emptied of this will--that the values of
\par _d\'e9cadence_, of _nihilism_, now prevail under the holiest names.
\par 
\par 
\par 7.
\par 
\par Christianity is called the religion of _pity_.--Pity stands in
\par opposition to all the tonic passions that augment the energy of the
\par feeling of aliveness: it is a depressant. A man loses power when he
\par pities. Through pity that drain upon strength which suffering works is
\par multiplied a thousandfold. Suffering is made contagious by pity; under
\par certain circumstances it may lead to a total sacrifice of life and
\par living energy--a loss out of all proportion to the magnitude of the
\par cause (--the case of the death of the Nazarene). This is the first view
\par of it; there is, however, a still more important one. If one measures
\par the effects of pity by the gravity of the reactions it sets up, its
\par character as a menace to life appears in a much clearer light. Pity
\par thwarts the whole law of evolution, which is the law of natural
\par selection. It preserves whatever is ripe for destruction; it fights on
\par the side of those disinherited and condemned by life; by maintaining
\par life in so many of the botched of all kinds, it gives life itself a
\par gloomy and dubious aspect. Mankind has ventured to call pity a virtue
\par (--in every _superior_ moral system it appears as a weakness--); going
\par still further, it has been called _the_ virtue, the source and
\par foundation of all other virtues--but let us always bear in mind that
\par this was from the standpoint of a philosophy that was nihilistic, and
\par upon whose shield _the denial of life_ was inscribed. Schopenhauer was
\par right in this: that by means of pity life is denied, and made _worthy of
\par denial_--pity is the technic of nihilism. Let me repeat: this depressing
\par and contagious instinct stands against all those instincts which work
\par for the preservation and enhancement of life: in the r\'f4le of _protector_
\par of the miserable, it is a prime agent in the promotion of
\par _d\'e9cadence_--pity persuades to extinction.... Of course, one doesn't say
\par "extinction": one says "the other world," or "God," or "the _true_
\par life," or Nirvana, salvation, blessedness.... This innocent rhetoric,
\par from the realm of religious-ethical balderdash, appears _a good deal
\par less innocent_ when one reflects upon the tendency that it conceals
\par beneath sublime words: the tendency to _destroy life_. Schopenhauer was
\par hostile to life: that is why pity appeared to him as a virtue....
\par Aristotle, as every one knows, saw in pity a sickly and dangerous state
\par of mind, the remedy for which was an occasional purgative: he regarded
\par tragedy as that purgative. The instinct of life should prompt us to seek
\par some means of puncturing any such pathological and dangerous
\par accumulation of pity as that appearing in Schopenhauer's case (and also,
\par alack, in that of our whole literary _d\'e9cadence_, from St. Petersburg to
\par Paris, from Tolstoi to Wagner), that it may burst and be discharged....
\par Nothing is more unhealthy, amid all our unhealthy modernism, than
\par Christian pity. To be the doctors _here_, to be unmerciful _here_, to
\par wield the knife _here_--all this is _our_ business, all this is _our_
\par sort of humanity, by this sign we are philosophers, we Hyperboreans!--
\par 
\par 
\par 8.
\par 
\par It is necessary to say just _whom_ we regard as our antagonists:
\par theologians and all who have any theological blood in their veins--this
\par is our whole philosophy.... One must have faced that menace at close
\par hand, better still, one must have had experience of it directly and
\par almost succumbed to it, to realize that it is not to be taken lightly
\par (--the alleged free-thinking of our naturalists and physiologists seems
\par to me to be a joke--they have no passion about such things; they have
\par not suffered--). This poisoning goes a great deal further than most
\par people think: I find the arrogant habit of the theologian among all who
\par regard themselves as "idealists"--among all who, by virtue of a higher
\par point of departure, claim a right to rise above reality, and to look
\par upon it with suspicion.... The idealist, like the ecclesiastic, carries
\par all sorts of lofty concepts in his hand (--and not only in his hand!);
\par he launches them with benevolent contempt against "understanding," "the
\par senses," "honor," "good living," "science"; he sees such things as
\par _beneath_ him, as pernicious and seductive forces, on which "the soul"
\par soars as a pure thing-in-itself--as if humility, chastity, poverty, in a
\par word, _holiness_, had not already done much more damage to life than all
\par imaginable horrors and vices.... The pure soul is a pure lie.... So long
\par as the priest, that _professional_ denier, calumniator and poisoner of
\par life, is accepted as a _higher_ variety of man, there can be no answer
\par to the question, What _is_ truth? Truth has already been stood on its
\par head when the obvious attorney of mere emptiness is mistaken for its
\par representative....
\par 
\par 
\par 9.
\par 
\par Upon this theological instinct I make war: I find the tracks of it
\par everywhere. Whoever has theological blood in his veins is shifty and
\par dishonourable in all things. The pathetic thing that grows out of this
\par condition is called _faith_: in other words, closing one's eyes upon
\par one's self once for all, to avoid suffering the sight of incurable
\par falsehood. People erect a concept of morality, of virtue, of holiness
\par upon this false view of all things; they ground good conscience upon
\par faulty vision; they argue that no _other_ sort of vision has value any
\par more, once they have made theirs sacrosanct with the names of "God,"
\par "salvation" and "eternity." I unearth this theological instinct in all
\par directions: it is the most widespread and the most _subterranean_ form
\par of falsehood to be found on earth. Whatever a theologian regards as true
\par _must_ be false: there you have almost a criterion of truth. His
\par profound instinct of self-preservation stands against truth ever coming
\par into honour in any way, or even getting stated. Wherever the influence
\par of theologians is felt there is a transvaluation of values, and the
\par concepts "true" and "false" are forced to change places: whatever is
\par most damaging to life is there called "true," and whatever exalts it,
\par intensifies it, approves it, justifies it and makes it triumphant is
\par there called "false."... When theologians, working through the
\par "consciences" of princes (or of peoples--), stretch out their hands for
\par _power_, there is never any doubt as to the fundamental issue: the will
\par to make an end, the _nihilistic_ will exerts that power....
\par 
\par 
\par 10.
\par 
\par Among Germans I am immediately understood when I say that theological
\par blood is the ruin of philosophy. The Protestant pastor is the
\par grandfather of German philosophy; Protestantism itself is its _peccatum
\par originale_. Definition of Protestantism: hemiplegic paralysis of
\par Christianity--_and_ of reason.... One need only utter the words
\par "T\'fcbingen School" to get an understanding of what German philosophy is
\par at bottom--a very artful form of theology.... The Suabians are the best
\par liars in Germany; they lie innocently.... Why all the rejoicing over
\par the appearance of Kant that went through the learned world of Germany,
\par three-fourths of which is made up of the sons of preachers and
\par teachers--why the German conviction still echoing, that with Kant came a
\par change for the _better_? The theological instinct of German scholars
\par made them see clearly just _what_ had become possible again.... A
\par backstairs leading to the old ideal stood open; the concept of the "true
\par world," the concept of morality as the _essence_ of the world (--the two
\par most vicious errors that ever existed!), were once more, thanks to a
\par subtle and wily scepticism, if not actually demonstrable, then _at
\par least_ no longer _refutable_.... _Reason_, the _prerogative_ of reason,
\par does not go so far.... Out of reality there had been made "appearance";
\par an absolutely false world, that of being, had been turned into
\par reality.... The success of Kant is merely a theological success; he was,
\par like Luther and Leibnitz, but one more impediment to German integrity,
\par already far from steady.--
\par 
\par 
\par 11.
\par 
\par A word now against Kant as a moralist. A virtue must be _our_ invention;
\par it must spring out of _our_ personal need and defence. In every other
\par case it is a source of danger. That which does not belong to our life
\par _menaces_ it; a virtue which has its roots in mere respect for the
\par concept of "virtue," as Kant would have it, is pernicious. "Virtue,"
\par "duty," "good for its own sake," goodness grounded upon impersonality or
\par a notion of universal validity--these are all chimeras, and in them one
\par finds only an expression of the decay, the last collapse of life, the
\par Chinese spirit of K\'f6nigsberg. Quite the contrary is demanded by the most
\par profound laws of self-preservation and of growth: to wit, that every man
\par find his _own_ virtue, his _own_ categorical imperative. A nation goes
\par to pieces when it confounds _its_ duty with the general concept of duty.
\par Nothing works a more complete and penetrating disaster than every
\par "impersonal" duty, every sacrifice before the Moloch of abstraction.--To
\par think that no one has thought of Kant's categorical imperative as
\par _dangerous to life_!... The theological instinct alone took it under
\par protection!--An action prompted by the life-instinct proves that it is a
\par _right_ action by the amount of pleasure that goes with it: and yet that
\par Nihilist, with his bowels of Christian dogmatism, regarded pleasure as
\par an _objection_.... What destroys a man more quickly than to work, think
\par and feel without inner necessity, without any deep personal desire,
\par without pleasure--as a mere automaton of duty? That is the recipe for
\par _d\'e9cadence_, and no less for idiocy.... Kant became an idiot.--And such
\par a man was the contemporary of Goethe! This calamitous spinner of cobwebs
\par passed for _the_ German philosopher--still passes today!... I forbid
\par myself to say what I think of the Germans.... Didn't Kant see in the
\par French Revolution the transformation of the state from the inorganic
\par form to the _organic_? Didn't he ask himself if there was a single event
\par that could be explained save on the assumption of a moral faculty in
\par man, so that on the basis of it, "the tendency of mankind toward the
\par good" could be _explained_, once and for all time? Kant's answer: "That
\par is revolution." Instinct at fault in everything and anything, instinct
\par as a revolt against nature, German _d\'e9cadence_ as a philosophy--_that is
\par Kant_!--
\par 
\par 
\par 12.
\par 
\par I put aside a few sceptics, the types of decency in the history of
\par philosophy: the rest haven't the slightest conception of intellectual
\par integrity. They behave like women, all these great enthusiasts and
\par prodigies--they regard "beautiful feelings" as arguments, the "heaving
\par breast" as the bellows of divine inspiration, conviction as the
\par _criterion_ of truth. In the end, with "German" innocence, Kant tried to
\par give a scientific flavour to this form of corruption, this dearth of
\par intellectual conscience, by calling it "practical reason." He
\par deliberately invented a variety of reasons for use on occasions when it
\par was desirable not to trouble with reason--that is, when morality, when
\par the sublime command "thou shalt," was heard. When one recalls the fact
\par that, among all peoples, the philosopher is no more than a development
\par from the old type of priest, this inheritance from the priest, this
\par _fraud upon self_, ceases to be remarkable. When a man feels that he has
\par a divine mission, say to lift up, to save or to liberate mankind--when a
\par man feels the divine spark in his heart and believes that he is the
\par mouthpiece of supernatural imperatives--when such a mission inflames
\par him, it is only natural that he should stand beyond all merely
\par reasonable standards of judgment. He feels that he is _himself_
\par sanctified by this mission, that he is himself a type of a higher
\par order!... What has a priest to do with philosophy! He stands far above
\par it!--And hitherto the priest has _ruled_!--He has determined the meaning
\par of "true" and "not true"!...
\par 
\par 
\par 13.
\par 
\par Let us not underestimate this fact: that _we
\par ourselves_, we free spirits, are already a "transvaluation of all
\par values," a _visualized_ declaration of war and victory against all the
\par old concepts of "true" and "not true." The most valuable intuitions are
\par the last to be attained; the most valuable of all are those which
\par determine _methods_. All the methods, all the principles of the
\par scientific spirit of today, were the targets for thousands of years of
\par the most profound contempt; if a man inclined to them he was excluded
\par from the society of "decent" people--he passed as "an enemy of God," as
\par a scoffer at the truth, as one "possessed." As a man of science, he
\par belonged to the Chandala[2].... We have had the whole pathetic stupidity
\par of mankind against us--their every notion of what the truth _ought_ to
\par be, of what the service of the truth _ought_ to be--their every "thou
\par shalt" was launched against us.... Our objectives, our methods, our
\par quiet, cautious, distrustful manner--all appeared to them as absolutely
\par discreditable and contemptible.--Looking back, one may almost ask one's
\par self with reason if it was not actually an _aesthetic_ sense that kept
\par men blind so long: what they demanded of the truth was picturesque
\par effectiveness, and of the learned a strong appeal to their senses. It
\par was our _modesty_ that stood out longest against their taste.... How
\par well they guessed that, these turkey-cocks of God!
\par 
\par [2] The lowest of the Hindu castes.
\par 
\par 
\par 14.
\par 
\par We have unlearned something. We have become more modest in every way. We
\par no longer derive man from the "spirit," from the "godhead"; we have
\par dropped him back among the beasts. We regard him as the strongest of the
\par beasts because he is the craftiest; one of the results thereof is his
\par intellectuality. On the other hand, we guard ourselves against a conceit
\par which would assert itself even here: that man is the great second
\par thought in the process of organic evolution. He is, in truth, anything
\par but the crown of creation: beside him stand many other animals, all at
\par similar stages of development.... And even when we say that we say a bit
\par too much, for man, relatively speaking, is the most botched of all the
\par animals and the sickliest, and he has wandered the most dangerously from
\par his instincts--though for all that, to be sure, he remains the most
\par _interesting_!--As regards the lower animals, it was Descartes who first
\par had the really admirable daring to describe them as _machina_; the whole
\par of our physiology is directed toward proving the truth of this doctrine.
\par Moreover, it is illogical to set man apart, as Descartes did: what we
\par know of man today is limited precisely by the extent to which we have
\par regarded him, too, as a machine. Formerly we accorded to man, as his
\par inheritance from some higher order of beings, what was called "free
\par will"; now we have taken even this will from him, for the term no longer
\par describes anything that we can understand. The old word "will" now
\par connotes only a sort of result, an individual reaction, that follows
\par inevitably upon a series of partly discordant and partly harmonious
\par stimuli--the will no longer "acts," or "moves."... Formerly it was
\par thought that man's consciousness, his "spirit," offered evidence of his
\par high origin, his divinity. That he might be _perfected_, he was advised,
\par tortoise-like, to draw his senses in, to have no traffic with earthly
\par things, to shuffle off his mortal coil--then only the important part of
\par him, the "pure spirit," would remain. Here again we have thought out the
\par thing better: to us consciousness, or "the spirit," appears as a symptom
\par of a relative imperfection of the organism, as an experiment, a groping,
\par a misunderstanding, as an affliction which uses up nervous force
\par unnecessarily--we deny that anything can be done perfectly so long as it
\par is done consciously. The "pure spirit" is a piece of pure stupidity:
\par take away the nervous system and the senses, the so-called "mortal
\par shell," and _the rest is miscalculation_--that is all!...
\par 
\par 
\par 15.
\par 
\par Under Christianity neither morality nor religion has any point of
\par contact with actuality. It offers purely imaginary _causes_ ("God,"
\par "soul," "ego," "spirit," "free will"--or even "unfree"), and purely
\par imaginary _effects_ ("sin," "salvation," "grace," "punishment,"
\par "forgiveness of sins"). Intercourse between imaginary _beings_ ("God,"
\par "spirits," "souls"); an imaginary _natural history_ (anthropocentric; a
\par total denial of the concept of natural causes); an imaginary
\par _psychology_ (misunderstandings of self, misinterpretations of agreeable
\par or disagreeable general feelings--for example, of the states of the
\par _nervus sympathicus_ with the help of the sign-language of
\par religio-ethical balderdash--, "repentance," "pangs of conscience,"
\par "temptation by the devil," "the presence of God"); an imaginary
\par _teleology_ (the "kingdom of God," "the last judgment," "eternal
\par life").--This purely _fictitious world_, greatly to its disadvantage, is
\par to be differentiated from the world of dreams; the latter at least
\par reflects reality, whereas the former falsifies it, cheapens it and
\par denies it. Once the concept of "nature" had been opposed to the concept
\par of "God," the word "natural" necessarily took on the meaning of
\par "abominable"--the whole of that fictitious world has its sources in
\par hatred of the natural (--the real!--), and is no more than evidence of a
\par profound uneasiness in the presence of reality.... _This explains
\par everything._ Who alone has any reason for living his way out of reality?
\par The man who suffers under it. But to suffer from reality one must be a
\par _botched_ reality.... The preponderance of pains over pleasures is the
\par cause of this fictitious morality and religion: but such a preponderance
\par also supplies the formula for _d\'e9cadence_....
\par 
\par 
\par 16.
\par 
\par A criticism of the _Christian concept of God_ leads inevitably to the
\par same conclusion.--A nation that still believes in itself holds fast to
\par its own god. In him it does honour to the conditions which enable it to
\par survive, to its virtues--it projects its joy in itself, its feeling of
\par power, into a being to whom one may offer thanks. He who is rich will
\par give of his riches; a proud people need a god to whom they can make
\par _sacrifices_.... Religion, within these limits, is a form of gratitude.
\par A man is grateful for his own existence: to that end he needs a
\par god.--Such a god must be able to work both benefits and injuries; he
\par must be able to play either friend or foe--he is wondered at for the
\par good he does as well as for the evil he does. But the castration,
\par against all nature, of such a god, making him a god of goodness alone,
\par would be contrary to human inclination. Mankind has just as much need
\par for an evil god as for a good god; it doesn't have to thank mere
\par tolerance and humanitarianism for its own existence.... What would be
\par the value of a god who knew nothing of anger, revenge, envy, scorn,
\par cunning, violence? who had perhaps never experienced the rapturous
\par _ardeurs_ of victory and of destruction? No one would understand such a
\par god: why should any one want him?--True enough, when a nation is on the
\par downward path, when it feels its belief in its own future, its hope of
\par freedom slipping from it, when it begins to see submission as a first
\par necessity and the virtues of submission as measures of self-preservation,
\par then it _must_ overhaul its god. He then becomes a hypocrite, timorous
\par and demure; he counsels "peace of soul," hate-no-more, leniency, "love"
\par of friend and foe. He moralizes endlessly; he creeps into every private
\par virtue; he becomes the god of every man; he becomes a private citizen, a
\par cosmopolitan.... Formerly he represented a people, the strength of a
\par people, everything aggressive and thirsty for power in the soul of a
\par people; now he is simply _the good god_.... The truth is that there is
\par no other alternative for gods: _either_ they are the will to power--in
\par which case they are national gods--_or_ incapacity for power--in which
\par case they have to be good....
\par 
\par 
\par 17.
\par 
\par Wherever the will to power begins to decline, in whatever form, there is
\par always an accompanying decline physiologically, a _d\'e9cadence_. The
\par divinity of this _d\'e9cadence_, shorn of its masculine virtues and
\par passions, is converted perforce into a god of the physiologically
\par degraded, of the weak. Of course, they do not _call_ themselves the
\par weak; they call themselves "the good."... No hint is needed to indicate
\par the moments in history at which the dualistic fiction of a good and an
\par evil god first became possible. The same instinct which prompts the
\par inferior to reduce their own god to "goodness-in-itself" also prompts
\par them to eliminate all good qualities from the god of their superiors;
\par they make revenge on their masters by making a _devil_ of the latter's
\par god.--The _good_ god, and the devil like him--both are abortions of
\par _d\'e9cadence_.--How can we be so tolerant of the na\'efvet\'e9 of Christian
\par theologians as to join in their doctrine that the evolution of the
\par concept of god from "the god of Israel," the god of a people, to the
\par Christian god, the essence of all goodness, is to be described as
\par _progress_?--But even Renan does this. As if Renan had a right to be
\par na\'efve! The contrary actually stares one in the face. When everything
\par necessary to _ascending_ life; when all that is strong, courageous,
\par masterful and proud has been eliminated from the concept of a god; when
\par he has sunk step by step to the level of a staff for the weary, a
\par sheet-anchor for the drowning; when he becomes the poor man's god, the
\par sinner's god, the invalid's god _par excellence_, and the attribute of
\par "saviour" or "redeemer" remains as the one essential attribute of
\par divinity--just _what_ is the significance of such a metamorphosis?
\par what does such a _reduction_ of the godhead imply?--To be
\par sure, the "kingdom of God" has thus grown larger. Formerly he had only
\par his own people, his "chosen" people. But since then he has gone
\par wandering, like his people themselves, into foreign parts; he has given
\par up settling down quietly anywhere; finally he has come to feel at home
\par everywhere, and is the great cosmopolitan--until now he has the "great
\par majority" on his side, and half the earth. But this god of the "great
\par majority," this democrat among gods, has not become a proud heathen god:
\par on the contrary, he remains a Jew, he remains a god in a corner, a god
\par of all the dark nooks and crevices, of all the noisesome quarters of the
\par world!... His earthly kingdom, now as always, is a kingdom of the
\par underworld, a _souterrain_ kingdom, a ghetto kingdom.... And he himself
\par is so pale, so weak, so _d\'e9cadent_.... Even the palest of the pale are
\par able to master him--messieurs the metaphysicians, those albinos of the
\par intellect. They spun their webs around him for so long that finally he
\par was hypnotized, and began to spin himself, and became another
\par metaphysician. Thereafter he resumed once more his old business of
\par spinning the world out of his inmost being _sub specie Spinozae_;
\par thereafter he became ever thinner and paler--became the "ideal," became
\par "pure spirit," became "the absolute," became "the thing-in-itself."...
\par _The collapse of a god_: he became a "thing-in-itself."
\par 
\par 
\par 18.
\par 
\par The Christian concept of a god--the god as the patron of the sick, the
\par god as a spinner of cobwebs, the god as a spirit--is one of the most
\par corrupt concepts that has ever been set up in the world: it probably
\par touches low-water mark in the ebbing evolution of the god-type. God
\par degenerated into the _contradiction of life_. Instead of being its
\par transfiguration and eternal Yea! In him war is declared on life, on
\par nature, on the will to live! God becomes the formula for every slander
\par upon the "here and now," and for every lie about the "beyond"! In him
\par nothingness is deified, and the will to nothingness is made holy!...
\par 
\par 
\par 19.
\par 
\par The fact that the strong races of northern Europe did not repudiate this
\par Christian god does little credit to their gift for religion--and not
\par much more to their taste. They ought to have been able to make an end of
\par such a moribund and worn-out product of the _d\'e9cadence_. A curse lies
\par upon them because they were not equal to it; they made illness,
\par decrepitude and contradiction a part of their instincts--and since then
\par they have not managed to _create_ any more gods. Two thousand years have
\par come and gone--and not a single new god! Instead, there still exists,
\par and as if by some intrinsic right,--as if he were the _ultimatum_ and
\par _maximum_ of the power to create gods, of the _creator spiritus_ in
\par mankind--this pitiful god of Christian monotono-theism! This hybrid
\par image of decay, conjured up out of emptiness, contradiction and vain
\par imagining, in which all the instincts of _d\'e9cadence_, all the cowardices
\par and wearinesses of the soul find their sanction!--
\par 
\par 
\par 20.
\par 
\par In my condemnation of Christianity I surely hope I do no injustice to a
\par related religion with an even larger number of believers: I allude to
\par _Buddhism_. Both are to be reckoned among the nihilistic religions--they
\par are both _d\'e9cadence_ religions--but they are separated from each other
\par in a very remarkable way. For the fact that he is able to _compare_ them
\par at all the critic of Christianity is indebted to the scholars of
\par India.--Buddhism is a hundred times as realistic as Christianity--it is
\par part of its living heritage that it is able to face problems objectively
\par and coolly; it is the product of long centuries of philosophical
\par speculation. The concept, "god," was already disposed of before it
\par appeared. Buddhism is the only genuinely _positive_ religion to be
\par encountered in history, and this applies even to its epistemology (which
\par is a strict phenomenalism). It does not speak of a "struggle with sin,"
\par but, yielding to reality, of the "struggle with suffering." Sharply
\par differentiating itself from Christianity, it puts the self-deception
\par that lies in moral concepts behind it; it is, in my phrase, _beyond_
\par good and evil.--The two physiological facts upon which it grounds itself
\par and upon which it bestows its chief attention are: first, an excessive
\par sensitiveness to sensation, which manifests itself as a refined
\par susceptibility to pain, and _secondly_, an extraordinary spirituality, a
\par too protracted concern with concepts and logical procedures, under the
\par influence of which the instinct of personality has yielded to a notion
\par of the "impersonal." (--Both of these states will be familiar to a few
\par of my readers, the objectivists, by experience, as they are to me).
\par These physiological states produced a _depression_, and Buddha tried to
\par combat it by hygienic measures. Against it he prescribed a life in the
\par open, a life of travel; moderation in eating and a careful selection of
\par foods; caution in the use of intoxicants; the same caution in arousing
\par any of the passions that foster a bilious habit and heat the blood;
\par finally, no _worry_, either on one's own account or on account of
\par others. He encourages ideas that make for either quiet contentment or
\par good cheer--he finds means to combat ideas of other sorts. He
\par understands good, the state of goodness, as something which promotes
\par health. _Prayer_ is not included, and neither is _asceticism_. There is
\par no categorical imperative nor any disciplines, even within the walls of
\par a monastery (--it is always possible to leave--). These things would
\par have been simply means of increasing the excessive sensitiveness above
\par mentioned. For the same reason he does not advocate any conflict with
\par unbelievers; his teaching is antagonistic to nothing so much as to
\par revenge, aversion, _ressentiment_ (--"enmity never brings an end to
\par enmity": the moving refrain of all Buddhism....) And in all this he was
\par right, for it is precisely these passions which, in view of his main
\par regiminal purpose, are _unhealthful_. The mental fatigue that he
\par observes, already plainly displayed in too much "objectivity" (that is,
\par in the individual's loss of interest in himself, in loss of balance and
\par of "egoism"), he combats by strong efforts to lead even the spiritual
\par interests back to the _ego_. In Buddha's teaching egoism is a duty. The
\par "one thing needful," the question "how can you be delivered from
\par suffering," regulates and determines the whole spiritual diet.
\par (--Perhaps one will here recall that Athenian who also declared war upon
\par pure "scientificality," to wit, Socrates, who also elevated egoism to
\par the estate of a morality).
\par 
\par 
\par 21.
\par 
\par The things necessary to Buddhism are a very mild climate, customs of
\par great gentleness and liberality, and _no_ militarism; moreover, it must
\par get its start among the higher and better educated classes.
\par Cheerfulness, quiet and the absence of desire are the chief desiderata,
\par and they are _attained_. Buddhism is not a religion in which perfection
\par is merely an object of aspiration: perfection is actually normal.--
\par 
\par Under Christianity the instincts of the subjugated and the oppressed
\par come to the fore: it is only those who are at the bottom who seek their
\par salvation in it. Here the prevailing pastime, the favourite remedy for
\par boredom is the discussion of sin, self-criticism, the inquisition of
\par conscience; here the emotion produced by _power_ (called "God") is
\par pumped up (by prayer); here the highest good is regarded as
\par unattainable, as a gift, as "grace." Here, too, open dealing is lacking;
\par concealment and the darkened room are Christian. Here body is despised
\par and hygiene is denounced as sensual; the church even ranges itself
\par against cleanliness (--the first Christian order after the banishment of
\par the Moors closed the public baths, of which there were 270 in Cordova
\par alone). Christian, too, is a certain cruelty toward one's self and
\par toward others; hatred of unbelievers; the will to persecute. Sombre and
\par disquieting ideas are in the foreground; the most esteemed states of
\par mind, bearing the most respectable names, are epileptoid; the diet is so
\par regulated as to engender morbid symptoms and over-stimulate the nerves.
\par Christian, again, is all deadly enmity to the rulers of the earth, to
\par the "aristocratic"--along with a sort of secret rivalry with them (--one
\par resigns one's "body" to them; one wants _only_ one's "soul"...). And
\par Christian is all hatred of the intellect, of pride, of courage, of
\par freedom, of intellectual _libertinage_; Christian is all hatred of the
\par senses, of joy in the senses, of joy in general....
\par 
\par 
\par 22.
\par 
\par When Christianity departed from its native soil, that of the lowest
\par orders, the _underworld_ of the ancient world, and began seeking power
\par among barbarian peoples, it no longer had to deal with _exhausted_ men,
\par but with men still inwardly savage and capable of self-torture--in
\par brief, strong men, but bungled men. Here, unlike in the case of the
\par Buddhists, the cause of discontent with self, suffering through self, is
\par _not_ merely a general sensitiveness and susceptibility to pain, but, on
\par the contrary, an inordinate thirst for inflicting pain on others, a
\par tendency to obtain subjective satisfaction in hostile deeds and ideas.
\par Christianity had to embrace _barbaric_ concepts and valuations in order
\par to obtain mastery over barbarians: of such sort, for example, are the
\par sacrifices of the first-born, the drinking of blood as a sacrament, the
\par disdain of the intellect and of culture; torture in all its forms,
\par whether bodily or not; the whole pomp of the cult. Buddhism is a
\par religion for peoples in a further state of development, for races that
\par have become kind, gentle and over-spiritualized (--Europe is not yet
\par ripe for it--): it is a summons that takes them back to peace and
\par cheerfulness, to a careful rationing of the spirit, to a certain
\par hardening of the body. Christianity aims at mastering _beasts of prey_;
\par its modus operandi is to make them _ill_--to make feeble is the
\par Christian recipe for taming, for "_civilizing_." Buddhism is a religion
\par for the closing, over-wearied stages of civilization. Christianity
\par appears before civilization has so much as begun--under certain
\par circumstances it lays the very foundations thereof.
\par 
\par 
\par 23.
\par 
\par Buddhism, I repeat, is a hundred times more austere, more honest, more
\par objective. It no longer has to _justify_ its pains, its susceptibility
\par to suffering, by interpreting these things in terms of sin--it simply
\par says, as it simply thinks, "I suffer." To the barbarian, however,
\par suffering in itself is scarcely understandable: what he needs, first of
\par all, is an explanation as to _why_ he suffers. (His mere instinct
\par prompts him to deny his suffering altogether, or to endure it in
\par silence.) Here the word "devil" was a blessing: man had to have an
\par omnipotent and terrible enemy--there was no need to be ashamed of
\par suffering at the hands of such an enemy.--
\par 
\par At the bottom of Christianity there are several subtleties that belong
\par to the Orient. In the first place, it knows that it is of very little
\par consequence whether a thing be true or not, so long as it is _believed_
\par to be true. Truth and _faith_: here we have two wholly distinct worlds
\par of ideas, almost two diametrically _opposite_ worlds--the road to the
\par one and the road to the other lie miles apart. To understand that fact
\par thoroughly--this is almost enough, in the Orient, to _make_ one a sage.
\par The Brahmins knew it, Plato knew it, every student of the esoteric knows
\par it. When, for example, a man gets any _pleasure_ out of the notion that
\par he has been saved from sin, it is _not_ necessary for him to be actually
\par sinful, but merely to _feel_ sinful. But when _faith_ is thus exalted
\par above everything else, it necessarily follows that reason, knowledge and
\par patient inquiry have to be discredited: the road to the truth becomes a
\par forbidden road.--Hope, in its stronger forms, is a great deal more
\par powerful _stimulans_ to life than any sort of realized joy can ever be.
\par Man must be sustained in suffering by a hope so high that no conflict
\par with actuality can dash it--so high, indeed, that no fulfilment can
\par _satisfy_ it: a hope reaching out beyond this world. (Precisely because
\par of this power that hope has of making the suffering hold out, the Greeks
\par regarded it as the evil of evils, as the most _malign_ of evils; it
\par remained behind at the source of all evil.)[3]--In order that _love_ may
\par be possible, God must become a person; in order that the lower instincts
\par may take a hand in the matter God must be young. To satisfy the ardor of
\par the woman a beautiful saint must appear on the scene, and to satisfy
\par that of the men there must be a virgin. These things are necessary if
\par Christianity is to assume lordship over a soil on which some
\par aphrodisiacal or Adonis cult has already established a notion as to what
\par a cult ought to be. To insist upon _chastity_ greatly strengthens the
\par vehemence and subjectivity of the religious instinct--it makes the cult
\par warmer, more enthusiastic, more soulful.--Love is the state in which man
\par sees things most decidedly as they are _not_. The force of illusion
\par reaches its highest here, and so does the capacity for sweetening, for
\par _transfiguring_. When a man is in love he endures more than at any other
\par time; he submits to anything. The problem was to devise a religion which
\par would allow one to love: by this means the worst that life has to offer
\par is overcome--it is scarcely even noticed.--So much for the three
\par Christian virtues: faith, hope and charity: I call them the three
\par Christian _ingenuities_.--Buddhism is in too late a stage of
\par development, too full of positivism, to be shrewd in any such way.--
\par 
\par [3] That is, in Pandora's box.
\par 
\par 
\par 24.
\par 
\par Here I barely touch upon the problem of the _origin_ of Christianity.
\par The _first_ thing necessary to its solution is this: that Christianity
\par is to be understood only by examining the soil from which it sprung--it
\par is _not_ a reaction against Jewish instincts; it is their inevitable
\par product; it is simply one more step in the awe-inspiring logic of the
\par Jews. In the words of the Saviour, "salvation is of the Jews."[4]--The
\par _second_ thing to remember is this: that the psychological type of the
\par Galilean is still to be recognized, but it was only in its most
\par degenerate form (which is at once maimed and overladen with foreign
\par features) that it could serve in the manner in which it has been used:
\par as a type of the _Saviour_ of mankind.--
\par 
\par [4] John\~iv, 22.
\par 
\par The Jews are the most remarkable people in the history of the world, for
\par when they were confronted with the question, to be or not to be, they
\par chose, with perfectly unearthly deliberation, to be _at any price_: this
\par price involved a radical _falsification_ of all nature, of all
\par naturalness, of all reality, of the whole inner world, as well as of
\par the outer. They put themselves _against_ all those conditions under
\par which, hitherto, a people had been able to live, or had even been
\par _permitted_ to live; out of themselves they evolved an idea which stood
\par in direct opposition to _natural_ conditions--one by one they distorted
\par religion, civilization, morality, history and psychology until each
\par became a _contradiction_ of its _natural significance_. We meet with the
\par same phenomenon later on, in an incalculably exaggerated form, but only
\par as a copy: the Christian church, put beside the "people of God," shows a
\par complete lack of any claim to originality. Precisely for this reason the
\par Jews are the most _fateful_ people in the history of the world: their
\par influence has so falsified the reasoning of mankind in this matter that
\par today the Christian can cherish anti-Semitism without realizing that it
\par is no more than the _final consequence of Judaism_.
\par 
\par In my "Genealogy of Morals" I give the first psychological explanation
\par of the concepts underlying those two antithetical things, a _noble_
\par morality and a _ressentiment_ morality, the second of which is a mere
\par product of the denial of the former. The Judaeo-Christian moral system
\par belongs to the second division, and in every detail. In order to be able
\par to say Nay to everything representing an _ascending_ evolution of
\par life--that is, to well-being, to power, to beauty, to self-approval--the
\par instincts of _ressentiment_, here become downright genius, had to invent
\par an _other_ world in which the _acceptance of life_ appeared as the most
\par evil and abominable thing imaginable. Psychologically, the Jews are a
\par people gifted with the very strongest vitality, so much so that when
\par they found themselves facing impossible conditions of life they chose
\par voluntarily, and with a profound talent for self-preservation, the side
\par of all those instincts which make for _d\'e9cadence_--_not_ as if mastered
\par by them, but as if detecting in them a power by which "the world" could
\par be _defied_. The Jews are the very opposite of _d\'e9cadents_: they have
\par simply been forced into _appearing_ in that guise, and with a degree of
\par skill approaching the _non plus ultra_ of histrionic genius they have
\par managed to put themselves at the head of all _d\'e9cadent_ movements (--for
\par example, the Christianity of Paul--), and so make of them something
\par stronger than any party frankly saying _Yes_ to life. To the sort of
\par men who reach out for power under Judaism and Christianity,--that is to
\par say, to the _priestly_ class--_d\'e9cadence_ is no more than a means to an
\par end. Men of this sort have a vital interest in making mankind sick, and
\par in confusing the values of "good" and "bad," "true" and "false" in a
\par manner that is not only dangerous to life, but also slanders it.
\par 
\par 
\par 25.
\par 
\par The history of Israel is invaluable as a typical history of an attempt
\par to _denaturize_ all natural values: I point to five facts which bear
\par this out. Originally, and above all in the time of the monarchy, Israel
\par maintained the _right_ attitude of things, which is to say, the natural
\par attitude. Its Jahveh was an expression of its consciousness of power,
\par its joy in itself, its hopes for itself: to him the Jews looked for
\par victory and salvation and through him they expected nature to give them
\par whatever was necessary to their existence--above all, rain. Jahveh is
\par the god of Israel, and _consequently_ the god of justice: this is the
\par logic of every race that has power in its hands and a good conscience in
\par the use of it. In the religious ceremonial of the Jews both aspects of
\par this self-approval stand revealed. The nation is grateful for the high
\par destiny that has enabled it to obtain dominion; it is grateful for the
\par benign procession of the seasons, and for the good fortune attending its
\par herds and its crops.--This view of things remained an ideal for a long
\par while, even after it had been robbed of validity by tragic blows:
\par anarchy within and the Assyrian without. But the people still retained,
\par as a projection of their highest yearnings, that vision of a king who
\par was at once a gallant warrior and an upright judge--a vision best
\par visualized in the typical prophet (_i. e._, critic and satirist of the
\par moment), Isaiah.--But every hope remained unfulfilled. The old god no
\par longer _could_ do what he used to do. He ought to have been abandoned.
\par But what actually happened? Simply this: the conception of him was
\par _changed_--the conception of him was _denaturized_; this was the price
\par that had to be paid for keeping him.--Jahveh, the god of "justice"--he
\par is in accord with Israel _no more_, he no longer vizualizes the national
\par egoism; he is now a god only conditionally.... The public notion of this
\par god now becomes merely a weapon in the hands of clerical agitators, who
\par interpret all happiness as a reward and all unhappiness as a punishment
\par for obedience or disobedience to him, for "sin": that most fraudulent of
\par all imaginable interpretations, whereby a "moral order of the world" is
\par set up, and the fundamental concepts, "cause" and "effect," are stood on
\par their heads. Once natural causation has been swept out of the world by
\par doctrines of reward and punishment some sort of _un_-natural causation
\par becomes necessary: and all other varieties of the denial of nature
\par follow it. A god who _demands_--in place of a god who helps, who gives
\par counsel, who is at bottom merely a name for every happy inspiration of
\par courage and self-reliance.... _Morality_ is no longer a reflection of
\par the conditions which make for the sound life and development of the
\par people; it is no longer the primary life-instinct; instead it has become
\par abstract and in opposition to life--a fundamental perversion of the
\par fancy, an "evil eye" on all things. _What_ is Jewish, _what_ is
\par Christian morality? Chance robbed of its innocence; unhappiness polluted
\par with the idea of "sin"; well-being represented as a danger, as a
\par "temptation"; a physiological disorder produced by the canker worm of
\par conscience....
\par 
\par 
\par 26.
\par 
\par The concept of god falsified; the concept of morality falsified;--but
\par even here Jewish priest-craft did not stop. The whole history of Israel
\par ceased to be of any value: out with it!--These priests accomplished that
\par miracle of falsification of which a great part of the Bible is the
\par documentary evidence; with a degree of contempt unparalleled, and in the
\par face of all tradition and all historical reality, they translated the
\par past of their people into _religious_ terms, which is to say, they
\par converted it into an idiotic mechanism of salvation, whereby all
\par offences against Jahveh were punished and all devotion to him was
\par rewarded. We would regard this act of historical falsification as
\par something far more shameful if familiarity with the _ecclesiastical_
\par interpretation of history for thousands of years had not blunted our
\par inclinations for uprightness _in historicis_. And the philosophers
\par support the church: the _lie_ about a "moral order of the world" runs
\par through the whole of philosophy, even the newest. What is the meaning
\par of a "moral order of the world"? That there is a thing called the will
\par of God which, once and for all time, determines what man ought to do and
\par what he ought not to do; that the worth of a people, or of an individual
\par thereof, is to be measured by the extent to which they or he obey this
\par will of God; that the destinies of a people or of an individual are
\par _controlled_ by this will of God, which rewards or punishes according to
\par the degree of obedience manifested.--In place of all that pitiable lie
\par _reality_ has this to say: the _priest_, a parasitical variety of man
\par who can exist only at the cost of every sound view of life, takes the
\par name of God in vain: he calls that state of human society in which he
\par himself determines the value of all things "the kingdom of God"; he
\par calls the means whereby that state of affairs is attained "the will of
\par God"; with cold-blooded cynicism he estimates all peoples, all ages and
\par all individuals by the extent of their subservience or opposition to the
\par power of the priestly order. One observes him at work: under the hand of
\par the Jewish priesthood the _great_ age of Israel became an age of
\par decline; the Exile, with its long series of misfortunes, was
\par transformed into a _punishment_ for that great age--during which priests
\par had not yet come into existence. Out of the powerful and _wholly free_
\par heroes of Israel's history they fashioned, according to their changing
\par needs, either wretched bigots and hypocrites or men entirely "godless."
\par They reduced every great event to the idiotic formula: "obedient _or_
\par disobedient to God."--They went a step further: the "will of God" (in
\par other words some means necessary for preserving the power of the
\par priests) had to be _determined_--and to this end they had to have a
\par "revelation." In plain English, a gigantic literary fraud had to be
\par perpetrated, and "holy scriptures" had to be concocted--and so, with the
\par utmost hierarchical pomp, and days of penance and much lamentation over
\par the long days of "sin" now ended, they were duly published. The "will of
\par God," it appears, had long stood like a rock; the trouble was that
\par mankind had neglected the "holy scriptures".... But the "will of God"
\par had already been revealed to Moses.... What happened? Simply this: the
\par priest had formulated, once and for all time and with the strictest
\par meticulousness, what tithes were to be paid to him, from the largest to
\par the smallest (--not forgetting the most appetizing cuts of meat, for
\par the priest is a great consumer of beefsteaks); in brief, he let it be
\par known just _what he wanted_, what "the will of God" was.... From this
\par time forward things were so arranged that the priest became
\par _indispensable everywhere_; at all the great natural events of life, at
\par birth, at marriage, in sickness, at death, not to say at the
\par "_sacrifice_" (that is, at meal-times), the holy parasite put in his
\par appearance, and proceeded to _denaturize_ it--in his own phrase, to
\par "sanctify" it.... For this should be noted: that every natural habit,
\par every natural institution (the state, the administration of justice,
\par marriage, the care of the sick and of the poor), everything demanded by
\par the life-instinct, in short, everything that has any value _in itself_,
\par is reduced to absolute worthlessness and even made the _reverse_ of
\par valuable by the parasitism of priests (or, if you chose, by the "moral
\par order of the world"). The fact requires a sanction--a power to _grant
\par values_ becomes necessary, and the only way it can create such values is
\par by denying nature.... The priest depreciates and desecrates nature: it
\par is only at this price that he can exist at all.--Disobedience to God,
\par which actually means to the priest, to "the law," now gets the name of
\par "sin"; the means prescribed for "reconciliation with God" are, of
\par course, precisely the means which bring one most effectively under the
\par thumb of the priest; he alone can "save".... Psychologically considered,
\par "sins" are indispensable to every society organized on an ecclesiastical
\par basis; they are the only reliable weapons of power; the priest _lives_
\par upon sins; it is necessary to him that there be "sinning".... Prime
\par axiom: "God forgiveth him that repenteth"--in plain English, _him that
\par submitteth to the priest_.
\par 
\par 
\par 27.
\par 
\par Christianity sprang from a soil so corrupt that on it everything
\par natural, every natural value, every _reality_ was opposed by the deepest
\par instincts of the ruling class--it grew up as a sort of war to the death
\par upon reality, and as such it has never been surpassed. The "holy
\par people," who had adopted priestly values and priestly names for all
\par things, and who, with a terrible logical consistency, had rejected
\par everything of the earth as "unholy," "worldly," "sinful"--this people
\par put its instinct into a final formula that was logical to the point of
\par self-annihilation: as _Christianity_ it actually denied even the last
\par form of reality, the "holy people," the "chosen people," _Jewish_
\par reality itself. The phenomenon is of the first order of importance: the
\par small insurrectionary movement which took the name of Jesus of Nazareth
\par is simply the Jewish instinct _redivivus_--in other words, it is the
\par priestly instinct come to such a pass that it can no longer endure the
\par priest as a fact; it is the discovery of a state of existence even more
\par fantastic than any before it, of a vision of life even more _unreal_
\par than that necessary to an ecclesiastical organization. Christianity
\par actually _denies_ the church....
\par 
\par I am unable to determine what was the target of the insurrection said to
\par have been led (whether rightly or _wrongly_) by Jesus, if it was not the
\par Jewish church--"church" being here used in exactly the same sense that
\par the word has today. It was an insurrection against the "good and just,"
\par against the "prophets of Israel," against the whole hierarchy of
\par society--_not_ against corruption, but against caste, privilege, order,
\par formalism. It was _unbelief_ in "superior men," a Nay flung at
\par everything that priests and theologians stood for. But the hierarchy
\par that was called into question, if only for an instant, by this movement
\par was the structure of piles which, above everything, was necessary to the
\par safety of the Jewish people in the midst of the "waters"--it represented
\par their _last_ possibility of survival; it was the final _residuum_ of
\par their independent political existence; an attack upon it was an attack
\par upon the most profound national instinct, the most powerful national
\par will to live, that has ever appeared on earth. This saintly anarchist,
\par who aroused the people of the abyss, the outcasts and "sinners," the
\par Chandala of Judaism, to rise in revolt against the established order of
\par things--and in language which, if the Gospels are to be credited, would
\par get him sent to Siberia today--this man was certainly a political
\par criminal, at least in so far as it was possible to be one in so
\par _absurdly unpolitical_ a community. This is what brought him to the
\par cross: the proof thereof is to be found in the inscription that was put
\par upon the cross. He died for his _own_ sins--there is not the slightest
\par ground for believing, no matter how often it is asserted, that he died
\par for the sins of others.--
\par 
\par 
\par 28.
\par 
\par As to whether he himself was conscious of this contradiction--whether,
\par in fact, this was the only contradiction he was cognizant of--that is
\par quite another question. Here, for the first time, I touch upon the
\par problem of the _psychology of the Saviour_.--I confess, to begin with,
\par that there are very few books which offer me harder reading than the
\par Gospels. My difficulties are quite different from those which enabled
\par the learned curiosity of the German mind to achieve one of its most
\par unforgettable triumphs. It is a long while since I, like all other young
\par scholars, enjoyed with all the sapient laboriousness of a fastidious
\par philologist the work of the incomparable Strauss.[5] At that time I was
\par twenty years old: now I am too serious for that sort of thing. What do I
\par care for the contradictions of "tradition"? How can any one call pious
\par legends "traditions"? The histories of saints present the most dubious
\par variety of literature in existence; to examine them by the scientific
\par method, _in the entire absence of corroborative documents_, seems to me
\par to condemn the whole inquiry from the start--it is simply learned
\par idling....
\par 
\par [5] David Friedrich Strauss (1808-74), author of "Das Leben Jesu"
\par (1835-6), a very famous work in its day. Nietzsche here refers to it.
\par 
\par 
\par 29.
\par 
\par What concerns _me_ is the psychological type of the Saviour. This type
\par might be depicted in the Gospels, in however mutilated a form and
\par however much overladen with extraneous characters--that is, in _spite_
\par of the Gospels; just as the figure of Francis of Assisi shows itself in
\par his legends in spite of his legends. It is _not_ a question of mere
\par truthful evidence as to what he did, what he said and how he actually
\par died; the question is, whether his type is still conceivable, whether it
\par has been handed down to us.--All the attempts that I know of to read the
\par _history_ of a "soul" in the Gospels seem to me to reveal only a
\par lamentable psychological levity. M. Renan, that mountebank _in
\par psychologicus_, has contributed the two most _unseemly_ notions to this
\par business of explaining the type of Jesus: the notion of the _genius_ and
\par that of the _hero_ ("_h\'e9ros_"). But if there is anything essentially
\par unevangelical, it is surely the concept of the hero. What the Gospels
\par make instinctive is precisely the reverse of all heroic struggle, of
\par all taste for conflict: the very incapacity for resistance is here
\par converted into something moral: ("resist not evil!"--the most profound
\par sentence in the Gospels, perhaps the true key to them), to wit, the
\par blessedness of peace, of gentleness, the _inability_ to be an enemy.
\par What is the meaning of "glad tidings"?--The true life, the life eternal
\par has been found--it is not merely promised, it is here, it is in _you_;
\par it is the life that lies in love free from all retreats and exclusions,
\par from all keeping of distances. Every one is the child of God--Jesus
\par claims nothing for himself alone--as the child of God each man is the
\par equal of every other man.... Imagine making Jesus a _hero_!--And what a
\par tremendous misunderstanding appears in the word "genius"! Our whole
\par conception of the "spiritual," the whole conception of our civilization,
\par could have had no meaning in the world that Jesus lived in. In the
\par strict sense of the physiologist, a quite different word ought to be
\par used here.... We all know that there is a morbid sensibility of the
\par tactile nerves which causes those suffering from it to recoil from every
\par touch, and from every effort to grasp a solid object. Brought to its
\par logical conclusion, such a physiological _habitus_ becomes an
\par instinctive hatred of all reality, a flight into the "intangible," into
\par the "incomprehensible"; a distaste for all formulae, for all conceptions
\par of time and space, for everything established--customs, institutions,
\par the church--; a feeling of being at home in a world in which no sort of
\par reality survives, a merely "inner" world, a "true" world, an "eternal"
\par world.... "The Kingdom of God is within _you_"....
\par 
\par 
\par 30.
\par 
\par _The instinctive hatred of reality_: the consequence of an extreme
\par susceptibility to pain and irritation--so great that merely to be
\par "touched" becomes unendurable, for every sensation is too profound.
\par 
\par _The instinctive exclusion of all aversion, all hostility, all bounds
\par and distances in feeling_: the consequence of an extreme susceptibility
\par to pain and irritation--so great that it senses all resistance, all
\par compulsion to resistance, as unbearable _anguish_ (--that is to say, as
\par _harmful_, as _prohibited_ by the instinct of self-preservation), and
\par regards blessedness (joy) as possible only when it is no longer
\par necessary to offer resistance to anybody or anything, however evil or
\par dangerous--love, as the only, as the _ultimate_ possibility of life....
\par 
\par These are the two _physiological realities_ upon and out of which the
\par doctrine of salvation has sprung. I call them a sublime
\par super-development of hedonism upon a thoroughly unsalubrious soil. What
\par stands most closely related to them, though with a large admixture of
\par Greek vitality and nerve-force, is epicureanism, the theory of salvation
\par of paganism. Epicurus was a _typical d\'e9cadent_: I was the first to
\par recognize him.--The fear of pain, even of infinitely slight pain--the
\par end of this _can_ be nothing save a _religion of love_....
\par 
\par 
\par 31.
\par 
\par I have already given my answer to the problem. The prerequisite to it is
\par the assumption that the type of the Saviour has reached us only in a
\par greatly distorted form. This distortion is very probable: there are many
\par reasons why a type of that sort should not be handed down in a pure
\par form, complete and free of additions. The milieu in which this strange
\par figure moved must have left marks upon him, and more must have been
\par imprinted by the history, the _destiny_, of the early Christian
\par communities; the latter indeed, must have embellished the type
\par retrospectively with characters which can be understood only as serving
\par the purposes of war and of propaganda. That strange and sickly world
\par into which the Gospels lead us--a world apparently out of a Russian
\par novel, in which the scum of society, nervous maladies and "childish"
\par idiocy keep a tryst--must, in any case, have _coarsened_ the type: the
\par first disciples, in particular, must have been forced to translate an
\par existence visible only in symbols and incomprehensibilities into their
\par own crudity, in order to understand it at all--in their sight the type
\par could take on reality only after it had been recast in a familiar
\par mould.... The prophet, the messiah, the future judge, the teacher of
\par morals, the worker of wonders, John the Baptist--all these merely
\par presented chances to misunderstand it.... Finally, let us not underrate
\par the _proprium_ of all great, and especially all sectarian veneration: it
\par tends to erase from the venerated objects all its original traits and
\par idiosyncrasies, often so painfully strange--_it does not even see
\par them_. It is greatly to be regretted that no Dostoyevsky lived in the
\par neighbourhood of this most interesting _d\'e9cadent_--I mean some one who
\par would have felt the poignant charm of such a compound of the sublime,
\par the morbid and the childish. In the last analysis, the type, as a type
\par of the _d\'e9cadence_, may actually have been peculiarly complex and
\par contradictory: such a possibility is not to be lost sight of.
\par Nevertheless, the probabilities seem to be against it, for in that case
\par tradition would have been particularly accurate and objective, whereas
\par we have reasons for assuming the contrary. Meanwhile, there is a
\par contradiction between the peaceful preacher of the mount, the sea-shore
\par and the fields, who appears like a new Buddha on a soil very unlike
\par India's, and the aggressive fanatic, the mortal enemy of theologians and
\par ecclesiastics, who stands glorified by Renan's malice as "_le grand
\par ma\'eetre en ironie_." I myself haven't any doubt that the greater part of
\par this venom (and no less of _esprit_) got itself into the concept of the
\par Master only as a result of the excited nature of Christian propaganda:
\par we all know the unscrupulousness of sectarians when they set out to turn
\par their leader into an _apologia_ for themselves. When the early
\par Christians had need of an adroit, contentious, pugnacious and
\par maliciously subtle theologian to tackle other theologians, they
\par _created_ a "god" that met that need, just as they put into his mouth
\par without hesitation certain ideas that were necessary to them but that
\par were utterly at odds with the Gospels--"the second coming," "the last
\par judgment," all sorts of expectations and promises, current at the
\par time.--
\par 
\par 
\par 32.
\par 
\par I can only repeat that I set myself against all efforts to intrude the
\par fanatic into the figure of the Saviour: the very word _imp\'e9rieux_, used
\par by Renan, is alone enough to _annul_ the type. What the "glad tidings"
\par tell us is simply that there are no more contradictions; the kingdom of
\par heaven belongs to _children_; the faith that is voiced here is no more
\par an embattled faith--it is at hand, it has been from the beginning, it is
\par a sort of recrudescent childishness of the spirit. The physiologists, at
\par all events, are familiar with such a delayed and incomplete puberty in
\par the living organism, the result of degeneration. A faith of this sort is
\par not furious, it does not denounce, it does not defend itself: it does
\par not come with "the sword"--it does not realize how it will one day set
\par man against man. It does not manifest itself either by miracles, or by
\par rewards and promises, or by "scriptures": it is itself, first and last,
\par its own miracle, its own reward, its own promise, its own "kingdom of
\par God." This faith does not formulate itself--it simply _lives_, and so
\par guards itself against formulae. To be sure, the accident of environment,
\par of educational background gives prominence to concepts of a certain
\par sort: in primitive Christianity one finds _only_ concepts of a
\par Judaeo-Semitic character (--that of eating and drinking at the last
\par supper belongs to this category--an idea which, like everything else
\par Jewish, has been badly mauled by the church). But let us be careful not
\par to see in all this anything more than symbolical language, semantics[6]
\par an opportunity to speak in parables. It is only on the theory that no
\par work is to be taken literally that this anti-realist is able to speak at
\par all. Set down among Hindus he would have made use of the concepts of
\par Sankhya,[7] and among Chinese he would have employed those of
\par Lao-tse[8]--and in neither case would it have made any difference to
\par him.--With a little freedom in the use of words, one might actually call
\par Jesus a "free spirit"[9]--he cares nothing for what is established: the
\par word _killeth_,[10] whatever is established _killeth_. The idea of
\par "life" as an _experience_, as he alone conceives it, stands opposed to
\par his mind to every sort of word, formula, law, belief and dogma. He
\par speaks only of inner things: "life" or "truth" or "light" is his word
\par for the innermost--in his sight everything else, the whole of reality,
\par all nature, even language, has significance only as sign, as
\par allegory.--Here it is of paramount importance to be led into no error by
\par the temptations lying in Christian, or rather _ecclesiastical_
\par prejudices: such a symbolism _par excellence_ stands outside all
\par religion, all notions of worship, all history, all natural science, all
\par worldly experience, all knowledge, all politics, all psychology, all
\par books, all art--his "wisdom" is precisely a _pure ignorance_[11] of all
\par such things. He has never heard of _culture_; he doesn't have to make
\par war on it--he doesn't even deny it.... The same thing may be said of the
\par _state_, of the whole bourgeoise social order, of labour, of war--he has
\par no ground for denying "the world," for he knows nothing of the
\par ecclesiastical concept of "the world".... _Denial_ is precisely the
\par thing that is impossible to him.--In the same way he lacks argumentative
\par capacity, and has no belief that an article of faith, a "truth," may be
\par established by proofs (--_his_ proofs are inner "lights," subjective
\par sensations of happiness and self-approval, simple "proofs of power"--).
\par Such a doctrine _cannot_ contradict: it doesn't know that other
\par doctrines exist, or _can_ exist, and is wholly incapable of imagining
\par anything opposed to it.... If anything of the sort is ever encountered,
\par it laments the "blindness" with sincere sympathy--for it alone has
\par "light"--but it does not offer objections....
\par 
\par [6] The word _Semiotik_ is in the text, but it is probable that
\par _Semantik_ is what Nietzsche had in mind.
\par 
\par [7] One of the six great systems of Hindu philosophy.
\par 
\par [8] The reputed founder of Taoism.
\par 
\par [9] Nietzsche's name for one accepting his own philosophy.
\par 
\par [10] That is, the strict letter of the law--the chief target of Jesus's
\par early preaching.
\par 
\par [11] A reference to the "pure ignorance" (_reine Thorheit_) of Parsifal.
\par 
\par 
\par 33.
\par 
\par In the whole psychology of the "Gospels" the concepts of guilt and
\par punishment are lacking, and so is that of reward. "Sin," which means
\par anything that puts a distance between God and man, is abolished--_this
\par is precisely the "glad tidings."_ Eternal bliss is not merely promised,
\par nor is it bound up with conditions: it is conceived as the _only_
\par reality--what remains consists merely of signs useful in speaking of it.
\par 
\par The _results_ of such a point of view project themselves into a new _way
\par of life_, the special evangelical way of life. It is not a "belief" that
\par marks off the Christian; he is distinguished by a different mode of
\par action; he acts _differently_. He offers no resistance, either by word
\par or in his heart, to those who stand against him. He draws no distinction
\par between strangers and countrymen, Jews and Gentiles ("neighbour," of
\par course, means fellow-believer, Jew). He is angry with no one, and he
\par despises no one. He neither appeals to the courts of justice nor heeds
\par their mandates ("Swear not at all").[12] He never under any
\par circumstances divorces his wife, even when he has proofs of her
\par infidelity.--And under all of this is one principle; all of it arises
\par from one instinct.--
\par 
\par [12] Matthew v, 34.
\par 
\par The life of the Saviour was simply a carrying out of this way of
\par life--and so was his death.... He no longer needed any formula or ritual
\par in his relations with God--not even prayer. He had rejected the whole of
\par the Jewish doctrine of repentance and atonement; he _knew_ that it was
\par only by a _way_ of life that one could feel one's self "divine,"
\par "blessed," "evangelical," a "child of God." _Not_ by "repentance," _not_
\par by "prayer and forgiveness" is the way to God: _only the Gospel way_
\par leads to God--it is _itself_ "God!"--What the Gospels _abolished_ was
\par the Judaism in the concepts of "sin," "forgiveness of sin," "faith,"
\par "salvation through faith"--the whole _ecclesiastical_ dogma of the Jews
\par was denied by the "glad tidings."
\par 
\par The deep instinct which prompts the Christian how to _live_ so that he
\par will feel that he is "in heaven" and is "immortal," despite many reasons
\par for feeling that he is _not_ "in heaven": this is the only psychological
\par reality in "salvation."--A new way of life, _not_ a new faith....
\par 
\par 
\par 34.
\par 
\par If I understand anything at all about this great symbolist, it is this:
\par that he regarded only _subjective_ realities as realities, as
\par "truths"--that he saw everything else, everything natural, temporal,
\par spatial and historical, merely as signs, as materials for parables. The
\par concept of "the Son of God" does not connote a concrete person in
\par history, an isolated and definite individual, but an "eternal" fact, a
\par psychological symbol set free from the concept of time. The same thing
\par is true, and in the highest sense, of the _God_ of this typical
\par symbolist, of the "kingdom of God," and of the "sonship of God." Nothing
\par could be more un-Christian than the _crude ecclesiastical_ notions of
\par God as a _person_, of a "kingdom of God" that is to come, of a "kingdom
\par of heaven" beyond, and of a "son of God" as the _second person_ of the
\par Trinity. All this--if I may be forgiven the phrase--is like thrusting
\par one's fist into the eye (and what an eye!) of the Gospels: a disrespect
\par for symbols amounting to _world-historical cynicism_.... But it is
\par nevertheless obvious enough what is meant by the symbols "Father" and
\par "Son"--not, of course, to every one--: the word "Son" expresses
\par _entrance_ into the feeling that there is a general transformation of
\par all things (beatitude), and "Father" expresses _that feeling
\par itself_--the sensation of eternity and of perfection.--I am ashamed to
\par remind you of what the church has made of this symbolism: has it not set
\par an Amphitryon story[13] at the threshold of the Christian "faith"? And a
\par dogma of "immaculate conception" for good measure?... _And thereby it
\par has robbed conception of its immaculateness_--
\par 
\par [13] Amphitryon was the son of Alcaeus, King of Tiryns.
\par His wife was Alcmene. During his absence she was visited by Zeus, and
\par bore Heracles.
\par 
\par The "kingdom of heaven" is a state of the heart--not something to come
\par "beyond the world" or "after death." The whole idea of natural death is
\par _absent_ from the Gospels: death is not a bridge, not a passing; it is
\par absent because it belongs to a quite different, a merely apparent world,
\par useful only as a symbol. The "hour of death" is _not_ a Christian
\par idea--"hours," time, the physical life and its crises have no existence
\par for the bearer of "glad tidings."... The "kingdom of God" is not
\par something that men wait for: it had no yesterday and no day after
\par tomorrow, it is not going to come at a "millennium"--it is an experience
\par of the heart, it is everywhere and it is nowhere....
\par 
\par 
\par 35.
\par 
\par This "bearer of glad tidings" died as he lived and _taught_--_not_ to
\par "save mankind," but to show mankind how to live. It was a _way of life_
\par that he bequeathed to man: his demeanour before the judges, before the
\par officers, before his accusers--his demeanour on the _cross_. He does not
\par resist; he does not defend his rights; he makes no effort to ward off
\par the most extreme penalty--more, _he invites it_.... And he prays,
\par suffers and loves _with_ those, _in_ those, who do him evil.... _Not_ to
\par defend one's self, _not_ to show anger, _not_ to lay blames.... On the
\par contrary, to submit even to the Evil One--to _love_ him....
\par 
\par 
\par 36.
\par 
\par --We free spirits--we are the first to have the necessary prerequisite
\par to understanding what nineteen centuries have misunderstood--that
\par instinct and passion for integrity which makes war upon the "holy lie"
\par even more than upon all other lies.... Mankind was unspeakably far from
\par our benevolent and cautious neutrality, from that discipline of the
\par spirit which alone makes possible the solution of such strange and
\par subtle things: what men always sought, with shameless egoism, was their
\par _own_ advantage therein; they created the _church_ out of denial of the
\par Gospels....
\par 
\par Whoever sought for signs of an ironical divinity's hand in the great
\par drama of existence would find no small indication thereof in the
\par _stupendous question-mark_ that is called Christianity. That mankind
\par should be on its knees before the very antithesis of what was the
\par origin, the meaning and the _law_ of the Gospels--that in the concept of
\par the "church" the very things should be pronounced holy that the "bearer
\par of glad tidings" regards as _beneath_ him and _behind_ him--it would be
\par impossible to surpass this as a grand example of _world-historical
\par irony_--
\par 
\par 
\par 37.
\par 
\par --Our age is proud of its historical sense: how, then, could it delude
\par itself into believing that the _crude fable of the wonder-worker and
\par Saviour_ constituted the beginnings of Christianity--and that everything
\par spiritual and symbolical in it only came later? Quite to the contrary,
\par the whole history of Christianity--from the death on the cross
\par onward--is the history of a progressively clumsier misunderstanding of
\par an _original_ symbolism. With every extension of Christianity among
\par larger and ruder masses, even less capable of grasping the principles
\par that gave birth to it, the need arose to make it more and more _vulgar_
\par and _barbarous_--it absorbed the teachings and rites of all the
\par _subterranean_ cults of the _imperium Romanum_, and the absurdities
\par engendered by all sorts of sickly reasoning. It was the fate of
\par Christianity that its faith had to become as sickly, as low and as
\par vulgar as the needs were sickly, low and vulgar to which it had to
\par administer. A _sickly barbarism_ finally lifts itself to power as the
\par church--the church, that incarnation of deadly hostility to all honesty,
\par to all loftiness of soul, to all discipline of the spirit, to all
\par spontaneous and kindly humanity.--_Christian_ values--_noble_ values: it
\par is only we, we _free_ spirits, who have re-established this greatest of
\par all antitheses in values!...
\par 
\par 
\par 38.
\par 
\par --I cannot, at this place, avoid a sigh. There are days when I am
\par visited by a feeling blacker than the blackest melancholy--_contempt of
\par man_. Let me leave no doubt as to _what_ I despise, _whom_ I despise:
\par it is the man of today, the man with whom I am unhappily
\par contemporaneous. The man of today--I am suffocated by his foul
\par breath!... Toward the past, like all who understand, I am full of
\par tolerance, which is to say, _generous_ self-control: with gloomy caution
\par I pass through whole millenniums of this madhouse of a world, call it
\par "Christianity," "Christian faith" or the "Christian church," as you
\par will--I take care not to hold mankind responsible for its lunacies. But
\par my feeling changes and breaks out irresistibly the moment I enter modern
\par times, _our_ times. Our age _knows better_.... What was formerly merely
\par sickly now becomes indecent--it is indecent to be a Christian today.
\par _And here my disgust begins._--I look about me: not a word survives of
\par what was once called "truth"; we can no longer bear to hear a priest
\par pronounce the word. Even a man who makes the most modest pretensions to
\par integrity _must_ know that a theologian, a priest, a pope of today not
\par only errs when he speaks, but actually _lies_--and that he no longer
\par escapes blame for his lie through "innocence" or "ignorance." The priest
\par knows, as every one knows, that there is no longer any "God," or any
\par "sinner," or any "Saviour"--that "free will" and the "moral order of the
\par world" are lies--: serious reflection, the profound self-conquest of the
\par spirit, _allow_ no man to pretend that he does _not_ know it.... _All_
\par the ideas of the church are now recognized for what they are--as the
\par worst counterfeits in existence, invented to debase nature and all
\par natural values; the priest himself is seen as he actually is--as the
\par most dangerous form of parasite, as the venomous spider of creation....
\par We know, our _conscience_ now knows--just _what_ the real value of all
\par those sinister inventions of priest and church has been and _what ends
\par they have served_, with their debasement of humanity to a state of
\par self-pollution, the very sight of which excites loathing,--the concepts
\par "the other world," "the last judgment," "the immortality of the soul,"
\par the "soul" itself: they are all merely so many instruments of torture,
\par systems of cruelty, whereby the priest becomes master and remains
\par master.... Every one knows this, _but nevertheless things remain as
\par before_. What has become of the last trace of decent feeling, of
\par self-respect, when our statesmen, otherwise an unconventional class of
\par men and thoroughly anti-Christian in their acts, now call themselves
\par Christians and go to the communion-table?... A prince at the head of his
\par armies, magnificent as the expression of the egoism and arrogance of his
\par people--and yet acknowledging, _without_ any shame, that he is a
\par Christian!... Whom, then, does Christianity deny? _what_ does it call
\par "the world"? To be a _soldier_, to be a judge, to be a patriot; to
\par defend one's self; to be careful of one's honour; to desire one's own
\par advantage; to be _proud_ ... every act of everyday, every instinct,
\par every valuation that shows itself in a _deed_, is now anti-Christian:
\par what a _monster of falsehood_ the modern man must be to call himself
\par nevertheless, and _without_ shame, a Christian!--
\par 
\par 
\par 39.
\par 
\par --I shall go back a bit, and tell you the _authentic_ history of
\par Christianity.--The very word "Christianity" is a misunderstanding--at
\par bottom there was only one Christian, and he died on the cross. The
\par "Gospels" _died_ on the cross. What, from that moment onward, was called
\par the "Gospels" was the very reverse of what _he_ had lived: "bad
\par tidings," a _Dysangelium_.[14] It is an error amounting to
\par nonsensicality to see in "faith," and particularly in faith in salvation
\par through Christ, the distinguishing mark of the Christian: only the
\par Christian _way of life_, the life _lived_ by him who died on the cross,
\par is Christian.... To this day _such_ a life is still possible, and for
\par _certain_ men even necessary: genuine, primitive Christianity will
\par remain possible in all ages.... _Not_ faith, but acts; above all, an
\par _avoidance_ of acts, a different _state of being_.... States of
\par consciousness, faith of a sort, the acceptance, for example, of anything
\par as true--as every psychologist knows, the value of these things is
\par perfectly indifferent and fifth-rate compared to that of the instincts:
\par strictly speaking, the whole concept of intellectual causality is false.
\par To reduce being a Christian, the state of Christianity, to an acceptance
\par of truth, to a mere phenomenon of consciousness, is to formulate the
\par negation of Christianity. _In fact, there are no Christians._ The
\par "Christian"--he who for two thousand years has passed as a Christian--is
\par simply a psychological self-delusion. Closely examined, it appears
\par that, _despite_ all his "faith," he has been ruled _only_ by his
\par instincts--and _what instincts_!--In all ages--for example, in the case
\par of Luther--"faith" has been no more than a cloak, a pretense, a _curtain_
\par behind which the instincts have played their game--a shrewd _blindness_
\par to the domination of _certain_ of the instincts.... I have already
\par called "faith" the specially Christian form of _shrewdness_--people
\par always _talk_ of their "faith" and _act_ according to their
\par instincts.... In the world of ideas of the Christian there is nothing
\par that so much as touches reality: on the contrary, one recognizes
\par an instinctive _hatred_ of reality as the motive power, the only motive
\par power at the bottom of Christianity. What follows therefrom? That even
\par here, in _psychologicis_, there is a radical error, which is to say one
\par conditioning fundamentals, which is to say, one in _substance_. Take
\par away one idea and put a genuine reality in its place--and the whole of
\par Christianity crumbles to nothingness!--Viewed calmly, this strangest of
\par all phenomena, a religion not only depending on errors, but inventive
\par and ingenious _only_ in devising injurious errors, poisonous to life
\par and to the heart--this remains a _spectacle for the gods_--for those
\par gods who are also philosophers, and whom I have encountered, for
\par example, in the celebrated dialogues at Naxos. At the moment when their
\par _disgust_ leaves them (--and us!) they will be thankful for the
\par spectacle afforded by the Christians: perhaps because of _this_ curious
\par exhibition alone the wretched little planet called the earth deserves a
\par glance from omnipotence, a show of divine interest.... Therefore, let us
\par not underestimate the Christians: the Christian, false _to the point of
\par innocence_, is far above the ape--in its application to the Christians a
\par well-known theory of descent becomes a mere piece of politeness....
\par 
\par [14] So in the text. One of Nietzsche's numerous coinages, obviously
\par suggested by _Evangelium_, the German for _gospel_.
\par 
\par 
\par 40.
\par 
\par --The fate of the Gospels was decided by death--it hung on the "cross."...
\par It was only death, that unexpected and shameful death; it was only
\par the cross, which was usually reserved for the canaille only--it was only
\par this appalling paradox which brought the disciples face to face with the
\par real riddle: "_Who was it? what was it_?"--The feeling of dismay, of
\par profound affront and injury; the suspicion that such a death might
\par involve a _refutation_ of their cause; the terrible question, "Why just
\par in this way?"--this state of mind is only too easy to understand. Here
\par everything _must_ be accounted for as necessary; everything must have a
\par meaning, a reason, the highest sort of reason; the love of a disciple
\par excludes all chance. Only then did the chasm of doubt yawn: "_Who_ put
\par him to death? who was his natural enemy?"--this question flashed like a
\par lightning-stroke. Answer: dominant Judaism, its ruling class. From that
\par moment, one found one's self in revolt _against_ the established order,
\par and began to understand Jesus as _in revolt against the established
\par order_. Until then this militant, this nay-saying, nay-doing element in
\par his character had been lacking; what is more, he had appeared to present
\par its opposite. Obviously, the little community had _not_ understood what
\par was precisely the most important thing of all: the example offered by
\par this way of dying, the freedom from and superiority to every feeling of
\par _ressentiment_--a plain indication of how little he was understood at
\par all! All that Jesus could hope to accomplish by his death, in itself,
\par was to offer the strongest possible proof, or _example_, of his
\par teachings in the most public manner.... But his disciples were very far
\par from _forgiving_ his death--though to have done so would have accorded
\par with the Gospels in the highest degree; and neither were they prepared
\par to _offer_ themselves, with gentle and serene calmness of heart, for a
\par similar death.... On the contrary, it was precisely the most
\par unevangelical of feelings, _revenge_, that now possessed them. It seemed
\par impossible that the cause should perish with his death: "recompense" and
\par "judgment" became necessary (--yet what could be less evangelical than
\par "recompense," "punishment," and "sitting in judgment"!). Once more the
\par popular belief in the coming of a messiah appeared in the foreground;
\par attention was rivetted upon an historical moment: the "kingdom of God"
\par is to come, with judgment upon his enemies.... But in all this there was
\par a wholesale misunderstanding: imagine the "kingdom of God" as a last
\par act, as a mere promise! The Gospels had been, in fact, the incarnation,
\par the fulfilment, the _realization_ of this "kingdom of God." It was only
\par now that all the familiar contempt for and bitterness against Pharisees
\par and theologians began to appear in the character of the Master--he was
\par thereby _turned_ into a Pharisee and theologian himself! On the other
\par hand, the savage veneration of these completely unbalanced souls could
\par no longer endure the Gospel doctrine, taught by Jesus, of the equal
\par right of all men to be children of God: their revenge took the form of
\par _elevating_ Jesus in an extravagant fashion, and thus separating him
\par from themselves: just as, in earlier times, the Jews, to revenge
\par themselves upon their enemies, separated themselves from their God, and
\par placed him on a great height. The One God and the Only Son of God: both
\par were products of _ressentiment_....
\par 
\par 
\par 41.
\par 
\par --And from that time onward an absurd problem offered itself: "how
\par _could_ God allow it!" To which the deranged reason of the little
\par community formulated an answer that was terrifying in its absurdity: God
\par gave his son as a _sacrifice_ for the forgiveness of sins. At once there
\par was an end of the gospels! Sacrifice for sin, and in its most obnoxious
\par and barbarous form: sacrifice of the _innocent_ for the sins of the
\par guilty! What appalling paganism!--Jesus himself had done away with the
\par very concept of "guilt," he denied that there was any gulf fixed between
\par God and man; he _lived_ this unity between God and man, and that was
\par precisely _his_ "glad tidings".... And _not_ as a mere privilege!--From
\par this time forward the type of the Saviour was corrupted, bit by bit, by
\par the doctrine of judgment and of the second coming, the doctrine of death
\par as a sacrifice, the doctrine of the _resurrection_, by means of which
\par the entire concept of "blessedness," the whole and only reality of the
\par gospels, is juggled away--in favour of a state of existence _after_
\par death!... St. Paul, with that rabbinical impudence which shows itself in
\par all his doings, gave a logical quality to that conception, that
\par _indecent_ conception, in this way: "_If_ Christ did not rise from the
\par dead, then all our faith is in vain!"--And at once there sprang from the
\par Gospels the most contemptible of all unfulfillable promises, the
\par _shameless_ doctrine of personal immortality.... Paul even preached it
\par as a _reward_....
\par 
\par 
\par 42.
\par 
\par One now begins to see just _what_ it was that came to an end with the
\par death on the cross: a new and thoroughly original effort to found a
\par Buddhistic peace movement, and so establish _happiness on earth_--real,
\par _not_ merely promised. For this remains--as I have already pointed
\par out--the essential difference between the two religions of _d\'e9cadence_:
\par Buddhism promises nothing, but actually fulfils; Christianity promises
\par everything, but _fulfils nothing_.--Hard upon the heels of the "glad
\par tidings" came the worst imaginable: those of Paul. In Paul is incarnated
\par the very opposite of the "bearer of glad tidings"; he represents the
\par genius for hatred, the vision of hatred, the relentless logic of hatred.
\par _What_, indeed, has not this dysangelist sacrificed to hatred! Above
\par all, the Saviour: he nailed him to _his own_ cross. The life, the
\par example, the teaching, the death of Christ, the meaning and the law of
\par the whole gospels--nothing was left of all this after that counterfeiter
\par in hatred had reduced it to his uses. Surely _not_ reality; surely _not_
\par historical truth!... Once more the priestly instinct of the Jew
\par perpetrated the same old master crime against history--he simply struck
\par out the yesterday and the day before yesterday of Christianity, and
\par _invented his own history of Christian beginnings_. Going further, he
\par treated the history of Israel to another falsification, so that it
\par became a mere prologue to _his_ achievement: all the prophets, it now
\par appeared, had referred to _his_ "Saviour."... Later on the church even
\par falsified the history of man in order to make it a prologue to
\par Christianity.... The figure of the Saviour, his teaching, his way of
\par life, his death, the meaning of his death, even the consequences of his
\par death--nothing remained untouched, nothing remained in even remote
\par contact with reality. Paul simply shifted the centre of gravity of that
\par whole life to a place _behind_ this existence--in the _lie_ of the
\par "risen" Jesus. At bottom, he had no use for the life of the
\par Saviour--what he needed was the death on the cross, _and_ something
\par more. To see anything honest in such a man as Paul, whose home was at
\par the centre of the Stoical enlightenment, when he converts an
\par hallucination into a _proof_ of the resurrection of the Saviour, or even
\par to believe his tale that he suffered from this hallucination
\par himself--this would be a genuine _niaiserie_ in a psychologist. Paul
\par willed the end; _therefore_ he also willed the means.... What he himself
\par didn't believe was swallowed readily enough by the idiots among whom he
\par spread _his_ teaching.--What _he_ wanted was power; in Paul the priest
\par once more reached out for power--he had use only for such concepts,
\par teachings and symbols as served the purpose of tyrannizing over the
\par masses and organizing mobs. _What_ was the only part of Christianity
\par that Mohammed borrowed later on? Paul's invention, his device for
\par establishing priestly tyranny and organizing the mob: the belief in the
\par immortality of the soul--_that is to say, the doctrine of
\par "judgment"_....
\par 
\par 
\par 43.
\par 
\par When the centre of gravity of life is placed, _not_ in life itself, but
\par in "the beyond"--in _nothingness_--then one has taken away its centre of
\par gravity altogether. The vast lie of personal immortality destroys all
\par reason, all natural instinct--henceforth, everything in the instincts
\par that is beneficial, that fosters life and that safeguards the future is
\par a cause of suspicion. So to live that life no longer has any meaning:
\par _this_ is now the "meaning" of life.... Why be public-spirited? Why take
\par any pride in descent and forefathers? Why labour together, trust one
\par another, or concern one's self about the common welfare, and try to
\par serve it?... Merely so many "temptations," so many strayings from the
\par "straight path."--"_One_ thing only is necessary".... That every man,
\par because he has an "immortal soul," is as good as every other man; that
\par in an infinite universe of things the "salvation" of _every_ individual
\par may lay claim to eternal importance; that insignificant bigots and the
\par three-fourths insane may assume that the laws of nature are constantly
\par _suspended_ in their behalf--it is impossible to lavish too much
\par contempt upon such a magnification of every sort of selfishness to
\par infinity, to _insolence_. And yet Christianity has to thank precisely
\par _this_ miserable flattery of personal vanity for its _triumph_--it was
\par thus that it lured all the botched, the dissatisfied, the fallen upon
\par evil days, the whole refuse and off-scouring of humanity to its side.
\par The "salvation of the soul"--in plain English: "the world revolves
\par around _me_."... The poisonous doctrine, "_equal_ rights for all," has
\par been propagated as a Christian principle: out of the secret nooks and
\par crannies of bad instinct Christianity has waged a deadly war upon all
\par feelings of reverence and distance between man and man, which is to
\par say, upon the first _prerequisite_ to every step upward, to every
\par development of civilization--out of the _ressentiment_ of the masses it
\par has forged its chief weapons against _us_, against everything noble,
\par joyous and high-spirited on earth, against our happiness on earth.... To
\par allow "immortality" to every Peter and Paul was the greatest, the most
\par vicious outrage upon _noble_ humanity ever perpetrated.--_And_ let us
\par not underestimate the fatal influence that Christianity has had, even
\par upon politics! Nowadays no one has courage any more for special rights,
\par for the right of dominion, for feelings of honourable pride in himself
\par and his equals--for the _pathos of distance_.... Our politics is sick
\par with this lack of courage!--The aristocratic attitude of mind has been
\par undermined by the lie of the equality of souls; and if belief in the
\par "privileges of the majority" makes and _will continue to make_
\par revolutions--it is Christianity, let us not doubt, and _Christian_
\par valuations, which convert every revolution into a carnival of blood and
\par crime! Christianity is a revolt of all creatures that creep on the
\par ground against everything that is _lofty_: the gospel of the "lowly"
\par _lowers_....
\par 
\par 
\par 44.
\par 
\par --The gospels are invaluable as evidence of the corruption that was
\par already persistent _within_ the primitive community. That which Paul,
\par with the cynical logic of a rabbi, later developed to a conclusion was
\par at bottom merely a process of decay that had begun with the death of the
\par Saviour.--These gospels cannot be read too carefully; difficulties lurk
\par behind every word. I confess--I hope it will not be held against
\par me--that it is precisely for this reason that they offer first-rate joy
\par to a psychologist--as the _opposite_ of all merely na\'efve corruption, as
\par refinement _par excellence_, as an artistic triumph in psychological
\par corruption. The gospels, in fact, stand alone. The Bible as a whole is
\par not to be compared to them. Here we are among Jews: this is the _first_
\par thing to be borne in mind if we are not to lose the thread of the
\par matter. This positive genius for conjuring up a delusion of personal
\par "holiness" unmatched anywhere else, either in books or by men; this
\par elevation of fraud in word and attitude to the level of an _art_--all
\par this is not an accident due to the chance talents of an individual, or
\par to any violation of nature. The thing responsible is _race_. The whole
\par of Judaism appears in Christianity as the art of concocting holy lies,
\par and there, after many centuries of earnest Jewish training and hard
\par practice of Jewish technic, the business comes to the stage of mastery.
\par The Christian, that _ultima ratio_ of lying, is the Jew all over
\par again--he is _threefold_ the Jew.... The underlying will to make use
\par only of such concepts, symbols and attitudes as fit into priestly
\par practice, the instinctive repudiation of every _other_ mode of thought,
\par and every other method of estimating values and utilities--this is not
\par only tradition, it is _inheritance_: only as an inheritance is it able
\par to operate with the force of nature. The whole of mankind, even the best
\par minds of the best ages (with one exception, perhaps hardly human--),
\par have permitted themselves to be deceived. The gospels have been read as
\par a _book of innocence_ ... surely no small indication of the high skill
\par with which the trick has been done.--Of course, if we could actually
\par _see_ these astounding bigots and bogus saints, even if only for an
\par instant, the farce would come to an end,--and it is precisely because
\par _I_ cannot read a word of theirs without seeing their attitudinizing
\par that _I have made an end of them_.... I simply cannot endure the way
\par they have of rolling up their eyes.--For the majority, happily enough,
\par books are mere _literature_.--Let us not be led astray: they say "judge
\par not," and yet they condemn to hell whoever stands in their way. In
\par letting God sit in judgment they judge themselves; in glorifying God
\par they glorify themselves; in _demanding_ that every one show the virtues
\par which they themselves happen to be capable of--still more, which they
\par _must_ have in order to remain on top--they assume the grand air of men
\par struggling for virtue, of men engaging in a war that virtue may prevail.
\par "We live, we die, we sacrifice ourselves _for the good_" (--"the truth,"
\par "the light," "the kingdom of God"): in point of fact, they simply do
\par what they cannot help doing. Forced, like hypocrites, to be sneaky, to
\par hide in corners, to slink along in the shadows, they convert their
\par necessity into a _duty_: it is on grounds of duty that they account for
\par their lives of humility, and that humility becomes merely one more proof
\par of their piety.... Ah, that humble, chaste, charitable brand of fraud!
\par "Virtue itself shall bear witness for us."... One may read the gospels
\par as books of _moral_ seduction: these petty folks fasten themselves to
\par morality--they know the uses of morality! Morality is the best of all
\par devices for leading mankind _by the nose_!--The fact is that the
\par conscious conceit of the chosen here disguises itself as modesty: it is
\par in this way that _they_, the "community," the "good and just," range
\par themselves, once and for always, on one side, the side of "the
\par truth"--and the rest of mankind, "the world," on the other.... In _that_
\par we observe the most fatal sort of megalomania that the earth has ever
\par seen: little abortions of bigots and liars began to claim exclusive
\par rights in the concepts of "God," "the truth," "the light," "the spirit,"
\par "love," "wisdom" and "life," as if these things were synonyms of
\par themselves and thereby they sought to fence themselves off from the
\par "world"; little super-Jews, ripe for some sort of madhouse, turned
\par values upside down in order to meet _their_ notions, just as if the
\par Christian were the meaning, the salt, the standard and even the _last
\par judgment_ of all the rest.... The whole disaster was only made possible
\par by the fact that there already existed in the world a similar
\par megalomania, allied to this one in race, to wit, the _Jewish_: once a
\par chasm began to yawn between Jews and Judaeo-Christians, the latter had
\par no choice but to employ the self-preservative measures that the Jewish
\par instinct had devised, even _against_ the Jews themselves, whereas the
\par Jews had employed them only against non-Jews. The Christian is simply a
\par Jew of the "reformed" confession.--
\par 
\par 
\par 45.
\par 
\par --I offer a few examples of the sort of thing these petty people have
\par got into their heads--what they have _put into the mouth_ of the Master:
\par the unalloyed creed of "beautiful souls."--
\par 
\par "And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart
\par thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against them.
\par Verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha
\par in the day of judgment, than for that city" (Mark\~vi, 11)--How
\par _evangelical_!...
\par 
\par "And whosoever shall offend one of _these_ little ones that believe in
\par me, it is better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck,
\par and he were cast into the sea" (Mark\~ix, 42).--How _evangelical_!...
\par 
\par "And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for
\par thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes
\par to be cast into hell fire; Where the worm dieth not, and the fire is not
\par quenched." (Mark\~ix, 47.[15])--It is not exactly the eye that is
\par meant....
\par 
\par [15] To which, without mentioning it, Nietzsche adds verse 48.
\par 
\par "Verily I say unto you, That there be some of them that stand here,
\par which shall not taste of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God
\par come with power." (Mark\~ix, 1.)--Well _lied_, lion![16]...
\par 
\par [16] A paraphrase of Demetrius' "Well roar'd, Lion!" in act v, scene 1
\par of "A Midsummer Night's Dream." The lion, of course, is the familiar
\par Christian symbol for Mark.
\par 
\par "Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
\par cross, and follow me. _For_..." (_Note of a psychologist._ Christian
\par morality is refuted by its _fors_: its reasons are against it,--this
\par makes it Christian.) Mark viii, 34.--
\par 
\par "Judge not, that ye be not judged. With what measure ye mete, it shall
\par be measured to you again." (Matthew\~vii, 1.[17])--What a notion of
\par justice, of a "just" judge!...
\par 
\par [17] Nietzsche also quotes part of verse 2.
\par 
\par "For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even
\par the publicans the same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye
\par more _than others_? do not even the publicans so?" (Matthew v,
\par 46.[18])--Principle of "Christian love": it insists upon being well
\par _paid_ in the end....
\par 
\par [18] The quotation also includes verse 47.
\par 
\par "But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father
\par forgive your trespasses." (Matthew\~vi, 15.)--Very compromising for the
\par said "father."...
\par 
\par "But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all
\par these things shall be added unto you." (Matthew\~vi, 33.)--All these
\par things: namely, food, clothing, all the necessities of life. An _error_,
\par to put it mildly.... A bit before this God appears as a tailor, at least
\par in certain cases....
\par 
\par "Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward _is_
\par great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers unto the
\par prophets." (Luke\~vi, 23.)--_Impudent_ rabble! It compares itself to the
\par prophets....
\par 
\par "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and _that_ the spirit of God
\par dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of God, _him shall God
\par destroy_; for the temple of God is holy, _which temple ye are_." (Paul,
\par 1\~Corinthians\~iii, 16.[19])--For that sort of thing one cannot have
\par enough contempt....
\par 
\par [19] And 17.
\par 
\par "Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? and if the world
\par shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?"
\par (Paul, 1\~Corinthians\~vi, 2.)--Unfortunately, not merely the speech of
\par a lunatic.... This _frightful impostor_ then proceeds: "Know ye not
\par that we shall judge angels? how much more things that pertain to this
\par life?"...
\par 
\par "Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? For after that in
\par the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by
\par the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.... Not many wise
\par men after the flesh, not men mighty, not many noble _are called_: But
\par God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise;
\par and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things
\par which are mighty; And base things of the world, and things which are
\par despised, hath God chosen, _yea_, and things which are not, to bring to
\par nought things that are: That no flesh should glory in his presence."
\par (Paul, 1\~Corinthians\~i, 20ff.[20])--In order to _understand_ this
\par passage, a first-rate example of the psychology underlying every
\par Chandala-morality, one should read the first part of my "Genealogy of
\par Morals": there, for the first time, the antagonism between a _noble_
\par morality and a morality born of _ressentiment_ and impotent vengefulness
\par is exhibited. Paul was the greatest of all apostles of revenge....
\par 
\par [20] Verses 20, 21, 26, 27, 28, 29.
\par 
\par 
\par 46.
\par 
\par --_What follows, then?_ That one had better put on gloves before reading
\par the New Testament. The presence of so much filth makes it very
\par advisable. One would as little choose "early Christians" for companions
\par as Polish Jews: not that one need seek out an objection to them....
\par Neither has a pleasant smell.--I have searched the New Testament in vain
\par for a single sympathetic touch; nothing is there that is free, kindly,
\par open-hearted or upright. In it humanity does not even make the first
\par step upward--the instinct for _cleanliness_ is lacking.... Only _evil_
\par instincts are there, and there is not even the courage of these evil
\par instincts. It is all cowardice; it is all a shutting of the eyes, a
\par self-deception. Every other book becomes clean, once one has read the
\par New Testament: for example, immediately after reading Paul I took up
\par with delight that most charming and wanton of scoffers, Petronius, of
\par whom one may say what Domenico Boccaccio wrote of C\'e6sar Borgia to the
\par Duke of Parma: "_\'e8 tutto festo_"--immortally healthy, immortally
\par cheerful and sound.... These petty bigots make a capital miscalculation.
\par They attack, but everything they attack is thereby _distinguished_.
\par Whoever is attacked by an "early Christian" is surely _not_ befouled....
\par On the contrary, it is an honour to have an "early Christian" as an
\par opponent. One cannot read the New Testament without acquired admiration
\par for whatever it abuses--not to speak of the "wisdom of this world,"
\par which an impudent wind-bag tries to dispose of "by the foolishness of
\par preaching."... Even the scribes and pharisees are benefitted by such
\par opposition: they must certainly have been worth something to have been
\par hated in such an indecent manner. Hypocrisy--as if this were a charge
\par that the "early Christians" _dared_ to make!--After all, they were the
\par _privileged_, and that was enough: the hatred of the Chandala needed no
\par other excuse. The "early Christian"--and also, I fear, the "last
\par Christian," _whom I may perhaps live to see_--is a rebel against all
\par privilege by profound instinct--he lives and makes war for ever for
\par "equal rights."... Strictly speaking, he has no alternative. When a man
\par proposes to represent, in his own person, the "chosen of God"--or to be
\par a "temple of God," or a "judge of the angels"--then every _other_
\par criterion, whether based upon honesty, upon intellect, upon manliness
\par and pride, or upon beauty and freedom of the heart, becomes simply
\par "worldly"--_evil in itself_.... Moral: every word that comes from the
\par lips of an "early Christian" is a lie, and his every act is
\par instinctively dishonest--all his values, all his aims are noxious, but
\par _whoever_ he hates, _whatever_ he hates, has real _value_.... The
\par Christian, and particularly the Christian priest, is thus a _criterion
\par of values_.
\par 
\par --Must I add that, in the whole New Testament, there appears but a
\par _solitary_ figure worthy of honour? Pilate, the Roman viceroy. To regard
\par a Jewish imbroglio _seriously_--that was quite beyond him. One Jew more
\par or less--what did it matter?... The noble scorn of a Roman, before whom
\par the word "truth" was shamelessly mishandled, enriched the New Testament
\par with the only saying _that has any value_--and that is at once its
\par criticism and its _destruction_: "What is truth?..."
\par 
\par 
\par 47.
\par 
\par --The thing that sets us apart is not that we are unable to find God,
\par either in history, or in nature, or behind nature--but that we regard
\par what has been honoured as God, not as "divine," but as pitiable, as
\par absurd, as injurious; not as a mere error, but as a _crime against
\par life_.... We deny that God is God.... If any one were to _show_ us this
\par Christian God, we'd be still less inclined to believe in him.--In a
\par formula: _deus, qualem Paulus creavit, dei negatio_.--Such a religion as
\par Christianity, which does not touch reality at a single point and which
\par goes to pieces the moment reality asserts its rights at any point, must
\par be inevitably the deadly enemy of the "wisdom of this world," which is
\par to say, of _science_--and it will give the name of good to whatever
\par means serve to poison, calumniate and _cry down_ all intellectual
\par discipline, all lucidity and strictness in matters of intellectual
\par conscience, and all noble coolness and freedom of the mind. "Faith," as
\par an imperative, vetoes science--_in praxi_, lying at any price.... Paul
\par _well knew_ that lying--that "faith"--was necessary; later on the church
\par borrowed the fact from Paul.--The God that Paul invented for himself, a
\par God who "reduced to absurdity" "the wisdom of this world" (especially
\par the two great enemies of superstition, philology and medicine), is in
\par truth only an indication of Paul's resolute _determination_ to
\par accomplish that very thing himself: to give one's own will the name of
\par God, _thora_--that is essentially Jewish. Paul _wants_ to dispose of the
\par "wisdom of this world": his enemies are the _good_ philologians and
\par physicians of the Alexandrine school--on them he makes his war. As a
\par matter of fact no man can be a _philologian_ or a physician without
\par being also _Antichrist_. That is to say, as a philologian a man sees
\par _behind_ the "holy books," and as a physician he sees _behind_ the
\par physiological degeneration of the typical Christian. The physician says
\par "incurable"; the philologian says "fraud."...
\par 
\par 
\par 48.
\par 
\par --Has any one ever clearly understood the celebrated story at the
\par beginning of the Bible--of God's mortal terror of _science_?... No one,
\par in fact, has understood it. This priest-book _par excellence_ opens, as
\par is fitting, with the great inner difficulty of the priest: _he_ faces
\par only one great danger; _ergo_, "God" faces only one great danger.--
\par 
\par The old God, wholly "spirit," wholly the high-priest, wholly perfect, is
\par promenading his garden: he is bored and trying to kill time. Against
\par boredom even gods struggle in vain.[21] What does he do? He creates
\par man--man is entertaining.... But then he notices that man is also bored.
\par God's pity for the only form of distress that invades all paradises
\par knows no bounds: so he forthwith creates other animals. God's first
\par mistake: to man these other animals were not entertaining--he sought
\par dominion over them; he did not want to be an "animal" himself.--So God
\par created woman. In the act he brought boredom to an end--and also many
\par other things! Woman was the _second_ mistake of God.--"Woman, at bottom,
\par is a serpent, Heva"--every priest knows that; "from woman comes every
\par evil in the world"--every priest knows that, too. _Ergo_, she is also to
\par blame for _science_.... It was through woman that man learned to taste
\par of the tree of knowledge.--What happened? The old God was seized by
\par mortal terror. Man himself had been his _greatest_ blunder; he had
\par created a rival to himself; science makes men _godlike_--it is all up
\par with priests and gods when man becomes scientific!--_Moral_: science is
\par the forbidden _per se_; it alone is forbidden. Science is the _first_ of
\par sins, the germ of all sins, the _original_ sin. _This is all there is of
\par morality._--"Thou shall _not_ know":--the rest follows from that.--God's
\par mortal terror, however, did not hinder him from being shrewd. How is one
\par to _protect_ one's self against science? For a long while this was the
\par capital problem. Answer: Out of paradise with man! Happiness, leisure,
\par foster thought--and all thoughts are bad thoughts!--Man _must_ not
\par think.--And so the priest invents distress, death, the mortal dangers of
\par childbirth, all sorts of misery, old age, decrepitude, above all,
\par _sickness_--nothing but devices for making war on science! The troubles
\par of man don't _allow_ him to think.... Nevertheless--how terrible!--, the
\par edifice of knowledge begins to tower aloft, invading heaven, shadowing
\par the gods--what is to be done?--The old God invents _war_; he separates
\par the peoples; he makes men destroy one another (--the priests have always
\par had need of war....). War--among other things, a great disturber of
\par science!--Incredible! Knowledge, _deliverance from the priests_,
\par prospers in spite of war.--So the old God comes to his final resolution:
\par "Man has become scientific--_there is no help for it: he must be
\par drowned!_"...
\par 
\par [21] A paraphrase of Schiller's "Against stupidity even gods struggle in
\par vain."
\par 
\par 
\par 49.
\par 
\par --I have been understood. At the opening of the Bible there is the
\par _whole_ psychology of the priest.--The priest knows of only one great
\par danger: that is science--the sound comprehension of cause and effect.
\par But science flourishes, on the whole, only under favourable
\par conditions--a man must have time, he must have an _overflowing_
\par intellect, in order to "know."... "_Therefore_, man must be made
\par unhappy,"--this has been, in all ages, the logic of the priest.--It is
\par easy to see just _what_, by this logic, was the first thing to come into
\par the world:--"_sin_."... The concept of guilt and punishment, the whole
\par "moral order of the world," was set up _against_ science--_against_ the
\par deliverance of man from priests.... Man must _not_ look outward; he must
\par look inward. He must _not_ look at things shrewdly and cautiously, to
\par learn about them; he must not look at all; he must _suffer_.... And he
\par must suffer so much that he is always in need of the priest.--Away with
\par physicians! _What is needed is a Saviour._--The concept of guilt and
\par punishment, including the doctrines of "grace," of "salvation," of
\par "forgiveness"--_lies_ through and through, and absolutely without
\par psychological reality--were devised to destroy man's _sense of
\par causality_: they are an attack upon the concept of cause and
\par effect!--And _not_ an attack with the fist, with the knife, with honesty
\par in hate and love! On the contrary, one inspired by the most cowardly,
\par the most crafty, the most ignoble of instincts! An attack of _priests_!
\par An attack of _parasites_! The vampirism of pale, subterranean
\par leeches!... When the natural consequences of an act are no longer
\par "natural," but are regarded as produced by the ghostly creations of
\par superstition--by "God," by "spirits," by "souls"--and reckoned as merely
\par "moral" consequences, as rewards, as punishments, as hints, as lessons,
\par then the whole ground-work of knowledge is destroyed--_then the greatest
\par of crimes against humanity has been perpetrated_.--I repeat that sin,
\par man's self-desecration _par excellence_, was invented in order to make
\par science, culture, and every elevation and ennobling of man impossible;
\par the priest _rules_ through the invention of sin.--
\par 
\par 
\par 50.
\par 
\par --In this place I can't permit myself to omit a psychology of "belief,"
\par of the "believer," for the special benefit of "believers." If there
\par remain any today who do not yet know how _indecent_ it is to be
\par "believing"--_or_ how much a sign of _d\'e9cadence_, of a broken will to
\par live--then they will know it well enough tomorrow. My voice reaches even
\par the deaf.--It appears, unless I have been incorrectly informed, that
\par there prevails among Christians a sort of criterion of truth that is
\par called "proof by power." "Faith makes blessed: _therefore_ it is
\par true."--It might be objected right here that blessedness is not
\par demonstrated, it is merely _promised_: it hangs upon "faith" as a
\par condition--one _shall_ be blessed _because_ one believes.... But what of
\par the thing that the priest promises to the believer, the wholly
\par transcendental "beyond"--how is _that_ to be demonstrated?--The "proof
\par by power," thus assumed, is actually no more at bottom than a belief
\par that the effects which faith promises will not fail to appear. In a
\par formula: "I believe that faith makes for blessedness--_therefore_, it is
\par true."... But this is as far as we may go. This "therefore" would be
\par _absurdum_ itself as a criterion of truth.--But let us admit, for the
\par sake of politeness, that blessedness by faith may be demonstrated
\par (--_not_ merely hoped for, and _not_ merely promised by the suspicious
\par lips of a priest): even so, _could_ blessedness--in a technical term,
\par _pleasure_--ever be a proof of truth? So little is this true that it is
\par almost a proof against truth when sensations of pleasure influence the
\par answer to the question "What is true?" or, at all events, it is enough
\par to make that "truth" highly suspicious. The proof by "pleasure" is a
\par proof _of_ "pleasure"--nothing more; why in the world should it be
\par assumed that _true_ judgments give more pleasure than false ones, and
\par that, in conformity to some pre-established harmony, they necessarily
\par bring agreeable feelings in their train?--The experience of all
\par disciplined and profound minds teaches _the contrary_. Man has had to
\par fight for every atom of the truth, and has had to pay for it almost
\par everything that the heart, that human love, that human trust cling to.
\par Greatness of soul is needed for this business: the service of truth is
\par the hardest of all services.--What, then, is the meaning of _integrity_
\par in things intellectual? It means that a man must be severe with his own
\par heart, that he must scorn "beautiful feelings," and that he makes every
\par Yea and Nay a matter of conscience!--Faith makes blessed: _therefore_,
\par it lies....
\par 
\par 
\par 51.
\par 
\par The fact that faith, under certain circumstances, may work for
\par blessedness, but that this blessedness produced by an _id\'e9e fixe_ by no
\par means makes the idea itself true, and the fact that faith actually moves
\par no mountains, but instead _raises them up_ where there were none before:
\par all this is made sufficiently clear by a walk through a _lunatic
\par asylum_. _Not_, of course, to a priest: for his instincts prompt him to
\par the lie that sickness is not sickness and lunatic asylums not lunatic
\par asylums. Christianity finds sickness _necessary_, just as the Greek
\par spirit had need of a superabundance of health--the actual ulterior
\par purpose of the whole system of salvation of the church is to _make_
\par people ill. And the church itself--doesn't it set up a Catholic lunatic
\par asylum as the ultimate ideal?--The whole earth as a madhouse?--The sort
\par of religious man that the church _wants_ is a typical _d\'e9cadent_; the
\par moment at which a religious crisis dominates a people is always marked
\par by epidemics of nervous disorder; the "inner world" of the religious man
\par is so much like the "inner world" of the overstrung and exhausted that
\par it is difficult to distinguish between them; the "highest" states of
\par mind, held up before mankind by Christianity as of supreme worth, are
\par actually epileptoid in form--the church has granted the name of holy
\par only to lunatics or to gigantic frauds _in majorem dei honorem_.... Once
\par I ventured to designate the whole Christian system of _training_[22] in
\par penance and salvation (now best studied in England) as a method of
\par producing a _folie circulaire_ upon a soil already prepared for it,
\par which is to say, a soil thoroughly unhealthy. Not every one may be a
\par Christian: one is not "converted" to Christianity--one must first
\par be sick enough for it.... We others, who have the _courage_ for health
\par _and_ likewise for contempt,--we may well despise a religion that
\par teaches misunderstanding of the body! that refuses to rid itself of the
\par superstition about the soul! that makes a "virtue" of insufficient
\par nourishment! that combats health as a sort of enemy, devil, temptation!
\par that persuades itself that it is possible to carry about a "perfect
\par soul" in a cadaver of a body, and that, to this end, had to devise for
\par itself a new concept of "perfection," a pale, sickly, idiotically
\par ecstatic state of existence, so-called "holiness"--a holiness that is
\par itself merely a series of symptoms of an impoverished, enervated and
\par incurably disordered body!... The Christian movement, as a European
\par movement, was from the start no more than a general uprising of all
\par sorts of outcast and refuse elements (--who now, under cover of
\par Christianity, aspire to power). It does _not_ represent the decay of a
\par race; it represents, on the contrary, a conglomeration of _d\'e9cadence_
\par products from all directions, crowding together and seeking one another
\par out. It was _not_, as has been thought, the corruption of antiquity, of
\par _noble_ antiquity, which made Christianity possible; one cannot too
\par sharply challenge the learned imbecility which today maintains that
\par theory. At the time when the sick and rotten Chandala classes in the
\par whole _imperium_ were Christianized, the _contrary type_, the nobility,
\par reached its finest and ripest development. The majority became master;
\par democracy, with its Christian instincts, _triumphed_.... Christianity
\par was not "national," it was not based on race--it appealed to all the
\par varieties of men disinherited by life, it had its allies everywhere.
\par Christianity has the rancour of the sick at its very core--the instinct
\par against the _healthy_, against _health_. Everything that is
\par well-constituted, proud, gallant and, above all, beautiful gives offence
\par to its ears and eyes. Again I remind you of Paul's priceless saying:
\par "And God hath chosen the _weak_ things of the world, the _foolish_
\par things of the world, the _base_ things of the world, and things which
\par are _despised_":[23] _this_ was the formula; _in hoc signo_ the
\par _d\'e9cadence_ triumphed.--_God on the cross_--is man always to miss the
\par frightful inner significance of this symbol?--Everything that suffers,
\par everything that hangs on the cross, is _divine_.... We all hang on the
\par cross, consequently _we_ are divine.... We alone are divine....
\par Christianity was thus a victory: a nobler attitude of mind was destroyed
\par by it--Christianity remains to this day the greatest misfortune of
\par humanity.--
\par 
\par [22] The word _training_ is in English in the text.
\par 
\par [23] 1\~Corinthians\~i, 27, 28.
\par 
\par 
\par 52.
\par 
\par Christianity also stands in opposition to all _intellectual_
\par well-being,--sick reasoning is the only sort that it _can_ use as
\par Christian reasoning; it takes the side of everything that is idiotic; it
\par pronounces a curse upon "intellect," upon the _superbia_ of the healthy
\par intellect. Since sickness is inherent in Christianity, it follows that
\par the typically Christian state of "faith" _must_ be a form of sickness
\par too, and that all straight, straightforward and scientific paths to
\par knowledge _must_ be banned by the church as _forbidden_ ways. Doubt is
\par thus a sin from the start.... The complete lack of psychological
\par cleanliness in the priest--revealed by a glance at him--is a phenomenon
\par _resulting_ from _d\'e9cadence_,--one may observe in hysterical women and
\par in rachitic children how regularly the falsification of instincts,
\par delight in lying for the mere sake of lying, and incapacity for looking
\par straight and walking straight are symptoms of _d\'e9cadence_. "Faith"
\par means the will to avoid knowing what is true. The pietist, the priest of
\par either sex, is a fraud _because_ he is sick: his instinct _demands_ that
\par the truth shall never be allowed its rights on any point. "Whatever
\par makes for illness is _good_; whatever issues from abundance, from
\par superabundance, from power, is _evil_": so argues the believer. The
\par _impulse to lie_--it is by this that I recognize every foreordained
\par theologian.--Another characteristic of the theologian is his _unfitness
\par for philology_. What I here mean by philology is, in a general sense,
\par the art of reading with profit--the capacity for absorbing facts
\par _without_ interpreting them falsely, and _without_ losing caution,
\par patience and subtlety in the effort to understand them. Philology as
\par _ephexis_[24] in interpretation: whether one be dealing with books, with
\par newspaper reports, with the most fateful events or with weather
\par statistics--not to mention the "salvation of the soul."... The way in
\par which a theologian, whether in Berlin or in Rome, is ready to explain,
\par say, a "passage of Scripture," or an experience, or a victory by the
\par national army, by turning upon it the high illumination of the Psalms of
\par David, is always so _daring_ that it is enough to make a philologian run
\par up a wall. But what shall he do when pietists and other such cows from
\par Suabia[25] use the "finger of God" to convert their miserably
\par commonplace and huggermugger existence into a miracle of "grace," a
\par "providence" and an "experience of salvation"? The most modest exercise
\par of the intellect, not to say of decency, should certainly be enough to
\par convince these interpreters of the perfect childishness and unworthiness
\par of such a misuse of the divine digital dexterity. However small our
\par piety, if we ever encountered a god who always cured us of a cold in the
\par head at just the right time, or got us into our carriage at the very
\par instant heavy rain began to fall, he would seem so absurd a god that
\par he'd have to be abolished even if he existed. God as a domestic servant,
\par as a letter carrier, as an almanac-man--at bottom, he is a mere name for
\par the stupidest sort of chance.... "Divine Providence," which every third
\par man in "educated Germany" still believes in, is so strong an argument
\par against God that it would be impossible to think of a stronger. And in
\par any case it is an argument against Germans!...
\par 
\par [24] That is, to say, scepticism. Among the Greeks scepticism was also
\par occasionally called ephecticism.
\par 
\par [25] A reference to the University of T\'fcbingen and its famous school of
\par Biblical criticism. The leader of this school was F.\~C. Baur, and one of
\par the men greatly influenced by it was Nietzsche's pet abomination, David
\par F. Strauss, himself a Suabian. _Vide_ \'a7\~10 and \'a7\~28.
\par 
\par 
\par 53.
\par 
\par --It is so little true that _martyrs_ offer any support to the truth of
\par a cause that I am inclined to deny that any martyr has ever had anything
\par to do with the truth at all. In the very tone in which a martyr flings
\par what he fancies to be true at the head of the world there appears so low
\par a grade of intellectual honesty and such _insensibility_ to the problem
\par of "truth," that it is never necessary to refute him. Truth is not
\par something that one man has and another man has not: at best, only
\par peasants, or peasant-apostles like Luther, can think of truth in any
\par such way. One may rest assured that the greater the degree of a man's
\par intellectual conscience the greater will be his modesty, his
\par _discretion_, on this point. To _know_ in five cases, and to refuse,
\par with delicacy, to know anything _further_.... "Truth," as the word is
\par understood by every prophet, every sectarian, every free-thinker, every
\par Socialist and every churchman, is simply a complete proof that not even
\par a beginning has been made in the intellectual discipline and
\par self-control that are necessary to the unearthing of even the smallest
\par truth.--The deaths of the martyrs, it may be said in passing, have been
\par misfortunes of history: they have _misled_.... The conclusion that all
\par idiots, women and plebeians come to, that there must be something in a
\par cause for which any one goes to his death (or which, as under primitive
\par Christianity, sets off epidemics of death-seeking)--this conclusion has
\par been an unspeakable drag upon the testing of facts, upon the whole
\par spirit of inquiry and investigation. The martyrs have _damaged_ the
\par truth.... Even to this day the crude fact of persecution is enough to
\par give an honourable name to the most empty sort of sectarianism.--But
\par why? Is the worth of a cause altered by the fact that some one had laid
\par down his life for it?--An error that becomes honourable is simply an
\par error that has acquired one seductive charm the more: do you suppose,
\par Messrs. Theologians, that we shall give you the chance to be martyred
\par for your lies?--One best disposes of a cause by respectfully putting it
\par on ice--that is also the best way to dispose of theologians.... This was
\par precisely the world-historical stupidity of all the persecutors: that
\par they gave the appearance of honour to the cause they opposed--that they
\par made it a present of the fascination of martyrdom.... Women are still on
\par their knees before an error because they have been told that some one
\par died on the cross for it. _Is the cross, then, an argument?_--But about
\par all these things there is one, and one only, who has said what has been
\par needed for thousands of years--_Zarathustra_.
\par 
\par      They made signs in blood along the way that they went, and their
\par      folly taught them that the truth is proved by blood.
\par 
\par      But blood is the worst of all testimonies to the truth; blood
\par      poisoneth even the purest teaching and turneth it into madness and
\par      hatred in the heart.
\par 
\par      And when one goeth through fire for his teaching--what doth that
\par      prove? Verily, it is more when one's teaching cometh out of one's
\par      own burning![26]
\par 
\par [26] The quotations are from "Also sprach Zarathustra" ii, 24: "Of
\par Priests."
\par 
\par 
\par 54.
\par 
\par Do not let yourself be deceived: great intellects are sceptical.
\par Zarathustra is a sceptic. The strength, the _freedom_ which proceed from
\par intellectual power, from a superabundance of intellectual power,
\par _manifest_ themselves as scepticism. Men of fixed convictions do not
\par count when it comes to determining what is fundamental in values and
\par lack of values. Men of convictions are prisoners. They do not see far
\par enough, they do not see what is _below_ them: whereas a man who would
\par talk to any purpose about value and non-value must be able to see five
\par hundred convictions _beneath_ him--and _behind_ him.... A mind that
\par aspires to great things, and that wills the means thereto, is
\par necessarily sceptical. Freedom from any sort of conviction _belongs_ to
\par strength, and to an independent point of view.... That grand passion
\par which is at once the foundation and the power of a sceptic's existence,
\par and is both more enlightened and more despotic than he is himself,
\par drafts the whole of his intellect into its service; it makes him
\par unscrupulous; it gives him courage to employ unholy means; under certain
\par circumstances it does not _begrudge_ him even convictions. Conviction as
\par a means: one may achieve a good deal by means of a conviction. A grand
\par passion makes use of and uses up convictions; it does not yield to
\par them--it knows itself to be sovereign.--On the contrary, the need of
\par faith, of something unconditioned by yea or nay, of Carlylism, if I may
\par be allowed the word, is a need of _weakness_. The man of faith, the
\par "believer" of any sort, is necessarily a dependent man--such a man
\par cannot posit _himself_ as a goal, nor can he find goals within himself.
\par The "believer" does not belong to himself; he can only be a means to an
\par end; he must be _used up_; he needs some one to use him up. His instinct
\par gives the highest honours to an ethic of self-effacement; he is prompted
\par to embrace it by everything: his prudence, his experience, his vanity.
\par Every sort of faith is in itself an evidence of self-effacement, of
\par self-estrangement.... When one reflects how necessary it is to the great
\par majority that there be regulations to restrain them from without and
\par hold them fast, and to what extent control, or, in a higher sense,
\par _slavery_, is the one and only condition which makes for the well-being
\par of the weak-willed man, and especially woman, then one at once
\par understands conviction and "faith." To the man with convictions they are
\par his backbone. To _avoid_ seeing many things, to be impartial about
\par nothing, to be a party man through and through, to estimate all values
\par strictly and infallibly--these are conditions necessary to the existence
\par of such a man. But by the same token they are _antagonists_ of the
\par truthful man--of the truth.... The believer is not free to answer the
\par question, "true" or "not true," according to the dictates of his own
\par conscience: integrity on _this_ point would work his instant downfall.
\par The pathological limitations of his vision turn the man of convictions
\par into a fanatic--Savonarola, Luther, Rousseau, Robespierre,
\par Saint-Simon--these types stand in opposition to the strong,
\par _emancipated_ spirit. But the grandiose attitudes of these _sick_
\par intellects, these intellectual epileptics, are of influence upon the
\par great masses--fanatics are picturesque, and mankind prefers observing
\par poses to listening to _reasons_....
\par 
\par 
\par 55.
\par 
\par --One step further in the psychology of conviction, of "faith." It is
\par now a good while since I first proposed for consideration the question
\par whether convictions are not even more dangerous enemies to truth than
\par lies. ("Human, All-Too-Human," I, aphorism 483.)[27] This time I desire
\par to put the question definitely: is there any actual difference between
\par a lie and a conviction?--All the world believes that there is; but what
\par is not believed by all the world!--Every conviction has its history, its
\par primitive forms, its stage of tentativeness and error: it _becomes_ a
\par conviction only after having been, for a long time, _not_ one, and then,
\par for an even longer time, _hardly_ one. What if falsehood be also one of
\par these embryonic forms of conviction?--Sometimes all that is needed is a
\par change in persons: what was a lie in the father becomes a conviction in
\par the son.--I call it lying to refuse to see what one sees, or to refuse
\par to see it _as_ it is: whether the lie be uttered before witnesses or not
\par before witnesses is of no consequence. The most common sort of lie is
\par that by which a man deceives himself: the deception of others is a
\par relatively rare offence.--Now, this will _not_ to see what one sees,
\par this will _not_ to see it as it is, is almost the first requisite for
\par all who belong to a party of whatever sort: the party man becomes
\par inevitably a liar. For example, the German historians are convinced that
\par Rome was synonymous with despotism and that the Germanic peoples brought
\par the spirit of liberty into the world: what is the difference between
\par this conviction and a lie? Is it to be wondered at that all partisans,
\par including the German historians, instinctively roll the fine phrases of
\par morality upon their tongues--that morality almost owes its very
\par _survival_ to the fact that the party man of every sort has need of it
\par every moment?--"This is _our_ conviction: we publish it to the whole
\par world; we live and die for it--let us respect all who have
\par convictions!"--I have actually heard such sentiments from the mouths of
\par anti-Semites. On the contrary, gentlemen! An anti-Semite surely does not
\par become more respectable because he lies on principle.... The priests,
\par who have more finesse in such matters, and who well understand the
\par objection that lies against the notion of a conviction, which is to say,
\par of a falsehood that becomes a matter of principle _because_ it serves a
\par purpose, have borrowed from the Jews the shrewd device of sneaking in
\par the concepts, "God," "the will of God" and "the revelation of God" at
\par this place. Kant, too, with his categorical imperative, was on the same
\par road: this was his _practical_ reason.[28] There are questions regarding
\par the truth or untruth of which it is _not_ for man to decide; all the
\par capital questions, all the capital problems of valuation, are beyond
\par human reason.... To know the limits of reason--_that_ alone is genuine
\par philosophy.... Why did God make a revelation to man? Would God have done
\par anything superfluous? Man _could_ not find out for himself what was good
\par and what was evil, so God taught him His will.... Moral: the priest does
\par _not_ lie--the question, "true" or "untrue," has nothing to do with such
\par things as the priest discusses; it is impossible to lie about these
\par things. In order to lie here it would be necessary to know _what_ is
\par true. But this is more than man _can_ know; therefore, the priest is
\par simply the mouthpiece of God.--Such a priestly syllogism
\par is by no means merely Jewish and Christian; the right to lie and the
\par _shrewd dodge_ of "revelation" belong to the general priestly type--to
\par the priest of the _d\'e9cadence_ as well as to the priest of pagan times
\par (--Pagans are all those who say yes to life, and to whom "God" is a word
\par signifying acquiescence in all things).--The "law," the "will of God,"
\par the "holy book," and "inspiration"--all these things are merely words
\par for the conditions _under_ which the priest comes to power and _with_
\par which he maintains his power,--these concepts are to be found at the
\par bottom of all priestly organizations, and of all priestly or
\par priestly-philosophical schemes of governments. The "holy lie"--common
\par alike to Confucius, to the Code of Manu, to Mohammed and to the
\par Christian church--is not even wanting in Plato. "Truth is here": this
\par means, no matter where it is heard, _the priest lies_....
\par 
\par [27] The aphorism, which is headed "The Enemies of Truth," makes the
\par direct statement: "Convictions are more dangerous enemies of truth than
\par lies."
\par 
\par [28] A reference, of course, to Kant's "Kritik der praktischen Vernunft"
\par (Critique of Practical Reason).
\par 
\par 
\par 56.
\par 
\par --In the last analysis it comes to this: what is the _end_ of lying? The
\par fact that, in Christianity, "holy" ends are not visible is _my_
\par objection to the means it employs. Only _bad_ ends appear: the
\par poisoning, the calumniation, the denial of life, the despising of the
\par body, the degradation and self-contamination of man by the concept of
\par sin--_therefore_, its means are also bad.--I have a contrary feeling
\par when I read the Code of Manu, an incomparably more intellectual and
\par superior work, which it would be a sin against the _intelligence_ to so
\par much as _name_ in the same breath with the Bible. It is easy to see why:
\par there is a genuine philosophy behind it, _in_ it, not merely an
\par evil-smelling mess of Jewish rabbinism and superstition,--it gives even
\par the most fastidious psychologist something to sink his teeth into. And,
\par _not_ to forget what is most important, it differs fundamentally from
\par every kind of Bible: by means of it the _nobles_, the philosophers and
\par the warriors keep the whip-hand over the majority; it is full of noble
\par valuations, it shows a feeling of perfection, an acceptance of life, and
\par triumphant feeling toward self and life--the _sun_ shines upon the whole
\par book.--All the things on which Christianity vents its fathomless
\par vulgarity--for example, procreation, women and marriage--are here
\par handled earnestly, with reverence and with love and confidence. How can
\par any one really put into the hands of children and ladies a book which
\par contains such vile things as this: "to avoid fornication, let every man
\par have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband; ... it is
\par better to marry than to burn"?[29] And is it _possible_ to be a
\par Christian so long as the origin of man is Christianized, which is to
\par say, _befouled_, by the doctrine of the _immaculata conceptio_?... I
\par know of no book in which so many delicate and kindly things are said of
\par women as in the Code of Manu; these old grey-beards and saints have a
\par way of being gallant to women that it would be impossible, perhaps, to
\par surpass. "The mouth of a woman," it says in one place, "the breasts of a
\par maiden, the prayer of a child and the smoke of sacrifice are always
\par pure." In another place: "there is nothing purer than the light of the
\par sun, the shadow cast by a cow, air, water, fire and the breath of a
\par maiden." Finally, in still another place--perhaps this is also a holy
\par lie--: "all the orifices of the body above the navel are pure, and all
\par below are impure. Only in the maiden is the whole body pure."
\par 
\par [29] 1\~Corinthians\~vii, 2, 9.
\par 
\par 
\par 57.
\par 
\par One catches the _unholiness_ of Christian means _in flagranti_ by the
\par simple process of putting the ends sought by Christianity beside the
\par ends sought by the Code of Manu--by putting these enormously
\par antithetical ends under a strong light. The critic of Christianity
\par cannot evade the necessity of making Christianity _contemptible_.--A
\par book of laws such as the Code of Manu has the same origin as every other
\par good law-book: it epitomizes the experience, the sagacity and the
\par ethical experimentation of long centuries; it brings things to a
\par conclusion; it no longer creates. The prerequisite to a codification of
\par this sort is recognition of the fact that the means which establish the
\par authority of a slowly and painfully attained _truth_ are fundamentally
\par different from those which one would make use of to prove it. A law-book
\par never recites the utility, the grounds, the casuistical antecedents of a
\par law: for if it did so it would lose the imperative tone, the "thou
\par shall," on which obedience is based. The problem lies exactly here.--At
\par a certain point in the evolution of a people, the class within it of the
\par greatest insight, which is to say, the greatest hindsight and foresight,
\par declares that the series of experiences determining how all shall
\par live--or _can_ live--has come to an end. The object now is to reap as
\par rich and as complete a harvest as possible from the days of experiment
\par and _hard_ experience. In consequence, the thing that is to be avoided
\par above everything is further experimentation--the continuation of the
\par state in which values are fluent, and are tested, chosen and criticized
\par _ad infinitum_. Against this a double wall is set up: on the one hand,
\par _revelation_, which is the assumption that the reasons lying behind the
\par laws are _not_ of human origin, that they were _not_ sought out and
\par found by a slow process and after many errors, but that they are of
\par divine ancestry, and came into being complete, perfect, without a
\par history, as a free gift, a miracle...; and on the other hand,
\par _tradition_, which is the assumption that the law has stood unchanged
\par from time immemorial, and that it is impious and a crime against one's
\par forefathers to bring it into question. The authority of the law is thus
\par grounded on the thesis: God gave it, and the fathers _lived_ it.--The
\par higher motive of such procedure lies in the design to distract
\par consciousness, step by step, from its concern with notions of right
\par living (that is to say, those that have been _proved_ to be right by
\par wide and carefully considered experience), so that instinct attains to a
\par perfect automatism--a primary necessity to every sort of mastery, to
\par every sort of perfection in the art of life. To draw up such a law-book
\par as Manu's means to lay before a people the possibility of future
\par mastery, of attainable perfection--it permits them to aspire to the
\par highest reaches of the art of life. _To that end the thing must be made
\par unconscious_: that is the aim of every holy lie.--The _order of castes_,
\par the highest, the dominating law, is merely the ratification of an _order
\par of nature_, of a natural law of the first rank, over which no arbitrary
\par fiat, no "modern idea," can exert any influence. In every healthy
\par society there are three physiological types, gravitating toward
\par differentiation but mutually conditioning one another, and each of these
\par has its own hygiene, its own sphere of work, its own special mastery and
\par feeling of perfection. It is _not_ Manu but nature that sets off in one
\par class those who are chiefly intellectual, in another those who are
\par marked by muscular strength and temperament, and in a third those who
\par are distinguished in neither one way or the other, but show only
\par mediocrity--the last-named represents the great majority, and the first
\par two the select. The superior caste--I call it the _fewest_--has, as the
\par most perfect, the privileges of the few: it stands for happiness, for
\par beauty, for everything good upon earth. Only the most intellectual of
\par men have any right to beauty, to the beautiful; only in them can
\par goodness escape being weakness. _Pulchrum est paucorum hominum_:[30]
\par goodness is a privilege. Nothing could be more unbecoming to them than
\par uncouth manners or a pessimistic look, or an eye that sees
\par _ugliness_--or indignation against the general aspect of things.
\par Indignation is the privilege of the Chandala; so is pessimism. "_The
\par world is perfect_"--so prompts the instinct of the intellectual, the
\par instinct of the man who says yes to life. "Imperfection, whatever is
\par _inferior_ to us, distance, the pathos of distance, even the Chandala
\par themselves are parts of this perfection." The most intelligent men, like
\par the _strongest_, find their happiness where others would find only
\par disaster: in the labyrinth, in being hard with themselves and with
\par others, in effort; their delight is in self-mastery; in them asceticism
\par becomes second nature, a necessity, an instinct. They regard a difficult
\par task as a privilege; it is to them a _recreation_ to play with burdens
\par that would crush all others.... Knowledge--a form of asceticism.--They
\par are the most honourable kind of men: but that does not prevent them
\par being the most cheerful and most amiable. They rule, not because they
\par want to, but because they _are_; they are not at liberty to play
\par second.--The _second caste_: to this belong the guardians of the law,
\par the keepers of order and security, the more noble warriors, above all,
\par the king as the highest form of warrior, judge and preserver of the law.
\par The second in rank constitute the executive arm of the intellectuals,
\par the next to them in rank, taking from them all that is _rough_ in the
\par business of ruling--their followers, their right hand, their most apt
\par disciples.--In all this, I repeat, there is nothing arbitrary, nothing
\par "made up"; whatever is to the _contrary_ is made up--by it nature is
\par brought to shame.... The order of castes, the _order of rank_, simply
\par formulates the supreme law of life itself; the separation of the three
\par types is necessary to the maintenance of society, and to the evolution
\par of higher types, and the highest types--the _inequality_ of rights is
\par essential to the existence of any rights at all.--A right is a
\par privilege. Every one enjoys the privileges that accord with his state of
\par existence. Let us not underestimate the privileges of the _mediocre_.
\par Life is always harder as one mounts the _heights_--the cold increases,
\par responsibility increases. A high civilization is a pyramid: it can stand
\par only on a broad base; its primary prerequisite is a strong and soundly
\par consolidated mediocrity. The handicrafts, commerce, agriculture,
\par _science_, the greater part of art, in brief, the whole range of
\par _occupational_ activities, are compatible only with mediocre ability and
\par aspiration; such callings would be out of place for exceptional men; the
\par instincts which belong to them stand as much opposed to aristocracy as
\par to anarchism. The fact that a man is publicly useful, that he is a
\par wheel, a function, is evidence of a natural predisposition; it is not
\par _society_, but the only sort of happiness that the majority are capable
\par of, that makes them intelligent machines. To the mediocre mediocrity is
\par a form of happiness; they have a natural instinct for mastering one
\par thing, for specialization. It would be altogether unworthy of a profound
\par intellect to see anything objectionable in mediocrity in itself. It is,
\par in fact, the _first_ prerequisite to the appearance of the exceptional:
\par it is a necessary condition to a high degree of civilization. When the
\par exceptional man handles the mediocre man with more delicate fingers than
\par he applies to himself or to his equals, this is not merely kindness of
\par heart--it is simply his _duty_.... Whom do I hate most heartily among
\par the rabbles of today? The rabble of Socialists, the apostles to the
\par Chandala, who undermine the workingman's instincts, his pleasure, his
\par feeling of contentment with his petty existence--who make him envious
\par and teach him revenge.... Wrong never lies in unequal rights; it lies in
\par the assertion of "equal" rights.... What is _bad_? But I have already
\par answered: all that proceeds from weakness, from envy, from
\par _revenge_.--The anarchist and the Christian have the same ancestry....
\par 
\par [30] Few men are noble.
\par 
\par 
\par 58.
\par 
\par In point of fact, the end for which one lies makes a great difference:
\par whether one preserves thereby or destroys. There is a perfect likeness
\par between Christian and anarchist: their object, their instinct, points
\par only toward destruction. One need only turn to history for a proof of
\par this: there it appears with appalling distinctness. We have just studied
\par a code of religious legislation whose object it was to convert the
\par conditions which cause life to _flourish_ into an "eternal" social
\par organization,--Christianity found its mission in putting an end to such
\par an organization, _because life flourished under it_. There the benefits
\par that reason had produced during long ages of experiment and insecurity
\par were applied to the most remote uses, and an effort was made to bring in
\par a harvest that should be as large, as rich and as complete as possible;
\par here, on the contrary, the harvest is _blighted_ overnight.... That
\par which stood there _aere perennis_, the _imperium Romanum_, the most
\par magnificent form of organization under difficult conditions that has
\par ever been achieved, and compared to which everything before it and after
\par it appears as patchwork, bungling, _dilletantism_--those holy anarchists
\par made it a matter of "piety" to destroy "the world," _which is to say_,
\par the _imperium Romanum_, so that in the end not a stone stood upon
\par another--and even Germans and other such louts were able to become its
\par masters.... The Christian and the anarchist: both are _d\'e9cadents_; both
\par are incapable of any act that is not disintegrating, poisonous,
\par degenerating, _blood-sucking_; both have an instinct of _mortal hatred_
\par of everything that stands up, and is great, and has durability, and
\par promises life a future.... Christianity was the vampire of the _imperium
\par Romanum_,--overnight it destroyed the vast achievement of the Romans:
\par the conquest of the soil for a great culture _that could await its
\par time_. Can it be that this fact is not yet understood? The _imperium
\par Romanum_ that we know, and that the history of the Roman provinces
\par teaches us to know better and better,--this most admirable of all works
\par of art in the grand manner was merely the beginning, and the structure
\par to follow was not to _prove_ its worth for thousands of years. To this
\par day, nothing on a like scale _sub specie aeterni_ has been brought into
\par being, or even dreamed of!--This organization was strong enough to
\par withstand bad emperors: the accident of personality has nothing to do
\par with such things--the _first_ principle of all genuinely great
\par architecture. But it was not strong enough to stand up against the
\par _corruptest_ of all forms of corruption--against Christians.... These
\par stealthy worms, which under the cover of night, mist and duplicity,
\par crept upon every individual, sucking him dry of all earnest interest in
\par _real_ things, of all instinct for _reality_--this cowardly, effeminate
\par and sugar-coated gang gradually alienated all "souls," step by step,
\par from that colossal edifice, turning against it all the meritorious,
\par manly and noble natures that had found in the cause of Rome their own
\par cause, their own serious purpose, their own _pride_. The sneakishness of
\par hypocrisy, the secrecy of the conventicle, concepts as black as hell,
\par such as the sacrifice of the innocent, the _unio mystica_ in the
\par drinking of blood, above all, the slowly rekindled fire of revenge, of
\par Chandala revenge--all _that_ sort of thing became master of Rome: the
\par same kind of religion which, in a pre-existent form, Epicurus had
\par combatted. One has but to read Lucretius to know _what_ Epicurus made
\par war upon--_not_ paganism, but "Christianity," which is to say, the
\par corruption of souls by means of the concepts of guilt, punishment and
\par immortality.--He combatted the _subterranean_ cults, the whole of latent
\par Christianity--to deny immortality was already a form of genuine
\par _salvation_.--Epicurus had triumphed, and every respectable intellect in
\par Rome was Epicurean--_when Paul appeared_ ... Paul, the Chandala hatred
\par of Rome, of "the world," in the flesh and inspired by genius--the Jew,
\par the _eternal_ Jew _par excellence_.... What he saw was how, with the aid
\par of the small sectarian Christian movement that stood apart from Judaism,
\par a "world conflagration" might be kindled; how, with the symbol of "God
\par on the cross," all secret seditions, all the fruits of anarchistic
\par intrigues in the empire, might be amalgamated into one immense power.
\par "Salvation is of the Jews."--Christianity is the formula for exceeding
\par _and_ summing up the subterranean cults of all varieties, that of
\par Osiris, that of the Great Mother, that of Mithras, for instance: in his
\par discernment of this fact the genius of Paul showed itself. His instinct
\par was here so sure that, with reckless violence to the truth, he put the
\par ideas which lent fascination to every sort of Chandala religion into the
\par mouth of the "Saviour" as his own inventions, and not only into the
\par mouth--he _made_ out of him something that even a priest of Mithras
\par could understand.... This was his revelation at Damascus: he grasped the
\par fact that he _needed_ the belief in immortality in order to rob "the
\par world" of its value, that the concept of "hell" would master Rome--that
\par the notion of a "beyond" is the _death of life_.... Nihilist and
\par Christian: they rhyme in German, and they do more than rhyme....
\par 
\par 
\par 59.
\par 
\par The whole labour of the ancient world gone for _naught_: I have no word
\par to describe the feelings that such an enormity arouses in me.--And,
\par considering the fact that its labour was merely preparatory, that with
\par adamantine self-consciousness it laid only the foundations for a work to
\par go on for thousands of years, the whole _meaning_ of antiquity
\par disappears!... To what end the Greeks? to what end the Romans?--All the
\par prerequisites to a learned culture, all the _methods_ of science, were
\par already there; man had already perfected the great and incomparable art
\par of reading profitably--that first necessity to the tradition of
\par culture, the unity of the sciences; the natural sciences, in alliance
\par with mathematics and mechanics, were on the right road,--_the sense of
\par fact_, the last and more valuable of all the senses, had its schools,
\par and its traditions were already centuries old! Is all this properly
\par understood? Every _essential_ to the beginning of the work was
\par ready:--and the _most_ essential, it cannot be said too often, are
\par methods, and also the most difficult to develop, and the longest opposed
\par by habit and laziness. What we have today reconquered, with unspeakable
\par self-discipline, for ourselves--for certain bad instincts, certain
\par Christian instincts, still lurk in our bodies--that is to say, the keen
\par eye for reality, the cautious hand, patience and seriousness in the
\par smallest things, the whole _integrity_ of knowledge--all these things
\par were already there, and had been there for two thousand years! _More_,
\par there was also a refined and excellent tact and taste! _Not_ as mere
\par brain-drilling! _Not_ as "German" culture, with its loutish manners! But
\par as body, as bearing, as instinct--in short, as reality.... _All gone for
\par naught!_ Overnight it became merely a memory!--The Greeks! The Romans!
\par Instinctive nobility, taste, methodical inquiry, genius for organization
\par and administration, faith in and the _will_ to secure the future of man,
\par a great yes to everything entering into the _imperium Romanum_ and
\par palpable to all the senses, a grand style that was beyond mere art, but
\par had become reality, truth, _life_....--All overwhelmed in a night, but
\par not by a convulsion of nature! Not trampled to death by Teutons and
\par others of heavy hoof! But brought to shame by crafty, sneaking,
\par invisible, an\'e6mic vampires! Not conquered,--only sucked dry!... Hidden
\par vengefulness, petty envy, became _master_! Everything wretched,
\par intrinsically ailing, and invaded by bad feelings, the whole
\par _ghetto-world_ of the soul, was at once _on top_!--One needs but read
\par any of the Christian agitators, for example, St. Augustine, in order to
\par realize, in order to smell, what filthy fellows came to the top. It
\par would be an error, however, to assume that there was any lack of
\par understanding in the leaders of the Christian movement:--ah, but they
\par were clever, clever to the point of holiness, these fathers of the
\par church! What they lacked was something quite different. Nature
\par neglected--perhaps forgot--to give them even the most modest endowment
\par of respectable, of upright, of _cleanly_ instincts.... Between
\par ourselves, they are not even men.... If Islam despises Christianity, it
\par has a thousandfold right to do so: Islam at least assumes that it is
\par dealing with _men_....
\par 
\par 
\par 60.
\par 
\par Christianity destroyed for us the whole harvest of ancient civilization,
\par and later it also destroyed for us the whole harvest of _Mohammedan_
\par civilization. The wonderful culture of the Moors in Spain, which was
\par fundamentally nearer to _us_ and appealed more to our senses and tastes
\par than that of Rome and Greece, was _trampled down_ (--I do not say by
\par what sort of feet--) Why? Because it had to thank noble and manly
\par instincts for its origin--because it said yes to life, even to the rare
\par and refined luxuriousness of Moorish life!... The crusaders later made
\par war on something before which it would have been more fitting for them
\par to have grovelled in the dust--a civilization beside which even that of
\par our nineteenth century seems very poor and very "senile."--What they
\par wanted, of course, was booty: the orient was rich.... Let us put aside
\par our prejudices! The crusades were a higher form of piracy, nothing more!
\par The German nobility, which is fundamentally a Viking nobility, was in
\par its element there: the church knew only too well how the German nobility
\par was to be _won_.... The German noble, always the "Swiss guard" of the
\par church, always in the service of every bad instinct of the church--_but
\par well paid_.... Consider the fact that it is precisely the aid of German
\par swords and German blood and valour that has enabled the church to carry
\par through its war to the death upon everything noble on earth! At this
\par point a host of painful questions suggest themselves. The German
\par nobility stands _outside_ the history of the higher civilization: the
\par reason is obvious.... Christianity, alcohol--the two _great_ means of
\par corruption.... Intrinsically there should be no more choice between
\par Islam and Christianity than there is between an Arab and a Jew. The
\par decision is already reached; nobody remains at liberty to choose here.
\par Either a man is a Chandala or he is not.... "War to the knife with Rome!
\par Peace and friendship with Islam!": this was the feeling, this was the
\par _act_, of that great free spirit, that genius among German emperors,
\par Frederick II. What! must a German first be a genius, a free spirit,
\par before he can feel _decently_? I can't make out how a German could ever
\par feel _Christian_....
\par 
\par 
\par 61.
\par 
\par Here it becomes necessary to call up a memory that must be a hundred
\par times more painful to Germans. The Germans have destroyed for Europe the
\par last great harvest of civilization that Europe was ever to reap--the
\par _Renaissance_. Is it understood at last, _will_ it ever be understood,
\par _what_ the Renaissance was? _The transvaluation of Christian
\par values_,--an attempt with all available means, all instincts and all the
\par resources of genius to bring about a triumph of the _opposite_ values,
\par the more _noble_ values.... This has been the one great war of the past;
\par there has never been a more critical question than that of the
\par Renaissance--it is _my_ question too--; there has never been a form of
\par _attack_ more fundamental, more direct, or more violently delivered by a
\par whole front upon the center of the enemy! To attack at the critical
\par place, at the very seat of Christianity, and there enthrone the more
\par noble values--that is to say, to _insinuate_ them into the instincts,
\par into the most fundamental needs and appetites of those sitting there ...
\par I see before me the _possibility_ of a perfectly heavenly enchantment
\par and spectacle:--it seems to me to scintillate with all the vibrations of
\par a fine and delicate beauty, and within it there is an art so divine, so
\par infernally divine, that one might search in vain for thousands of years
\par for another such possibility; I see a spectacle so rich in significance
\par and at the same time so wonderfully full of paradox that it should
\par arouse all the gods on Olympus to immortal laughter--_C\'e6sar Borgia as
\par pope!_... Am I understood?... Well then, _that_ would have been the
\par sort of triumph that _I_ alone am longing for today--: by it
\par Christianity would have been _swept away_!--What happened? A German
\par monk, Luther, came to Rome. This monk, with all the vengeful instincts
\par of an unsuccessful priest in him, raised a rebellion _against_ the
\par Renaissance in Rome.... Instead of grasping, with profound thanksgiving,
\par the miracle that had taken place: the conquest of Christianity at its
\par _capital_--instead of this, his hatred was stimulated by the spectacle.
\par A religious man thinks only of himself.--Luther saw only the _depravity_
\par of the papacy at the very moment when the opposite was becoming
\par apparent: the old corruption, the _peccatum originale_, Christianity
\par itself, no longer occupied the papal chair! Instead there was life!
\par Instead there was the triumph of life! Instead there was a great yea to
\par all lofty, beautiful and daring things!... And Luther _restored the
\par church_: he attacked it.... The Renaissance--an event without meaning, a
\par great futility!--Ah, these Germans, what they have not cost us!
\par _Futility_--that has always been the work of the Germans.--The
\par Reformation; Leibnitz; Kant and so-called German philosophy; the war
\par of "liberation"; the empire--every time a futile substitute for
\par something that once existed, for something _irrecoverable_.... These
\par Germans, I confess, are my enemies: I despise all their uncleanliness
\par in concept and valuation, their cowardice before every honest yea
\par and nay. For nearly a thousand years they have tangled and confused
\par everything their fingers have touched; they have on their conscience
\par all the half-way measures, all the three-eighths-way measures, that
\par Europe is sick of,--they also have on their conscience the uncleanest
\par variety of Christianity that exists, and the most incurable and
\par indestructible--Protestantism.... If mankind never manages to get rid
\par of Christianity the _Germans_ will be to blame....
\par 
\par 
\par 62.
\par 
\par --With this I come to a conclusion and pronounce my judgment. I
\par _condemn_ Christianity; I bring against the Christian church the most
\par terrible of all the accusations that an accuser has ever had in his
\par mouth. It is, to me, the greatest of all imaginable corruptions; it
\par seeks to work the ultimate corruption, the worst possible corruption.
\par The Christian church has left nothing untouched by its depravity; it has
\par turned every value into worthlessness, and every truth into a lie, and
\par every integrity into baseness of soul. Let any one dare to speak to me
\par of its "humanitarian" blessings! Its deepest necessities range it
\par against any effort to abolish distress; it lives by distress; it
\par _creates_ distress to make _itself_ immortal.... For example, the worm
\par of sin: it was the church that first enriched mankind with this
\par misery!--The "equality of souls before God"--this fraud, this _pretext_
\par for the _rancunes_ of all the base-minded--this explosive concept,
\par ending in revolution, the modern idea, and the notion of overthrowing
\par the whole social order--this is _Christian_ dynamite.... The
\par "humanitarian" blessings of Christianity forsooth! To breed out of
\par _humanitas_ a self-contradiction, an art of self-pollution, a will to
\par lie at any price, an aversion and contempt for all good and honest
\par instincts! All this, to me, is the "humanitarianism" of
\par Christianity!--Parasitism as the _only_ practice of the church; with its
\par an\'e6mic and "holy" ideals, sucking all the blood, all the love, all the
\par hope out of life; the beyond as the will to deny all reality; the cross
\par as the distinguishing mark of the most subterranean conspiracy ever
\par heard of,--against health, beauty, well-being, intellect, _kindness_ of
\par soul--_against life itself_....
\par 
\par This eternal accusation against Christianity I shall write upon all
\par walls, wherever walls are to be found--I have letters that even the
\par blind will be able to see.... I call Christianity the one great curse,
\par the one great intrinsic depravity, the one great instinct of revenge,
\par for which no means are venomous enough, or secret, subterranean and
\par _small_ enough,--I call it the one immortal blemish upon the human
\par race....
\par 
\par And mankind reckons _time_ from the _dies nefastus_ when this fatality
\par befell--from the _first_ day of Christianity!--_Why not rather from its
\par last?_--_From today?_--The transvaluation of all values!...
\par 
\par 
\par THE END
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Antichrist, by F. W. Nietzsche
\par 
\par *** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ANTICHRIST ***
\par 
\par ***** This file should be named 19322-8.txt or 19322-8.zip *****
\par This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
\par         http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/3/2/19322/
\par 
\par Produced by Laura Wisewell and the Online Distributed
\par Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
\par 
\par 
\par Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
\par will be renamed.
\par 
\par Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
\par one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
\par (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
\par permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
\par set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
\par copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
\par protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
\par Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
\par charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
\par do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
\par rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
\par such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
\par research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
\par practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
\par subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
\par redistribution.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par *** START: FULL LICENSE ***
\par 
\par THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
\par PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
\par 
\par To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
\par distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
\par (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
\par Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
\par Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
\par http://gutenberg.org/license).
\par 
\par 
\par Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
\par electronic works
\par 
\par 1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
\par electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
\par and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
\par (trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
\par the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
\par all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
\par If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
\par Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
\par terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
\par entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
\par 
\par 1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
\par used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
\par agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
\par things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
\par even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
\par paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
\par Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
\par and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
\par works.  See paragraph 1.E below.
\par 
\par 1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
\par or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
\par Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
\par collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
\par individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
\par located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
\par copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
\par works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
\par are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
\par Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
\par freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
\par this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
\par the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
\par keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
\par Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
\par 
\par 1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
\par what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
\par a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
\par the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
\par before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
\par creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
\par Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
\par the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
\par States.
\par 
\par 1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
\par 
\par 1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
\par access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
\par whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
\par phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
\par Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
\par copied or distributed:
\par 
\par This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
\par almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
\par re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
\par with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
\par 
\par 1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
\par from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
\par posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
\par and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
\par or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
\par with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
\par work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
\par through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
\par Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
\par 1.E.9.
\par 
\par 1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
\par with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
\par must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
\par terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
\par to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
\par permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
\par 
\par 1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
\par License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
\par work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
\par 
\par 1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
\par electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
\par prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
\par active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
\par Gutenberg-tm License.
\par 
\par 1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
\par compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
\par word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
\par distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
\par "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
\par posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
\par you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
\par copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
\par request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
\par form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
\par License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
\par 
\par 1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
\par performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
\par unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
\par 
\par 1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
\par access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
\par that
\par 
\par - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
\par      the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
\par      you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
\par      owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
\par      has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
\par      Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
\par      must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
\par      prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
\par      returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
\par      sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
\par      address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
\par      the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
\par 
\par - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
\par      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
\par      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
\par      License.  You must require such a user to return or
\par      destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
\par      and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
\par      Project Gutenberg-tm works.
\par 
\par - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
\par      money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
\par      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
\par      of receipt of the work.
\par 
\par - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
\par      distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
\par 
\par 1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
\par electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
\par forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
\par both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
\par Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
\par Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
\par 
\par 1.F.
\par 
\par 1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
\par effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
\par public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
\par collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
\par works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
\par "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
\par corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
\par property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
\par computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
\par your equipment.
\par 
\par 1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
\par of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
\par Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
\par Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
\par Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
\par liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
\par fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
\par LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
\par PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
\par TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
\par LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
\par INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
\par DAMAGE.
\par 
\par 1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
\par defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
\par receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
\par written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
\par received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
\par your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
\par the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
\par refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
\par providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
\par receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
\par is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
\par opportunities to fix the problem.
\par 
\par 1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
\par in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
\par WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
\par WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
\par 
\par 1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
\par warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
\par If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
\par law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
\par interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
\par the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
\par provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
\par 
\par 1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
\par trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
\par providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
\par with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
\par promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
\par harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
\par that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
\par or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
\par work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
\par Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
\par 
\par 
\par Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
\par 
\par Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
\par electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
\par including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
\par because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
\par people in all walks of life.
\par 
\par Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
\par assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
\par goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
\par remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
\par Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
\par and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
\par To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
\par and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
\par and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
\par 
\par 
\par Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
\par Foundation
\par 
\par The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
\par 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
\par state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
\par Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
\par number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
\par http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
\par Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
\par permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
\par 
\par The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
\par Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
\par throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
\par 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
\par business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
\par information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
\par page at http://pglaf.org
\par 
\par For additional contact information:
\par      Dr. Gregory B. Newby
\par      Chief Executive and Director
\par      gbnewby@pglaf.org
\par 
\par Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
\par Literary Archive Foundation
\par 
\par Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
\par spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
\par increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
\par freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
\par array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
\par ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
\par status with the IRS.
\par 
\par The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
\par charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
\par States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
\par considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
\par with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
\par where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
\par SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
\par particular state visit http://pglaf.org
\par 
\par While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
\par have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
\par against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
\par approach us with offers to donate.
\par 
\par International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
\par any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
\par outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
\par 
\par Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
\par methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
\par ways including checks, online payments and credit card
\par donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate
\par 
\par 
\par Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
\par works.
\par 
\par Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
\par concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
\par with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
\par Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
\par 
\par Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
\par editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
\par unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
\par keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
\par 
\par Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
\par 
\par      http://www.gutenberg.org
\par 
\par This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
\par including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
\par Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
\par subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
\par 
\par *** END: FULL LICENSE ***
\par }{\*\themedata 504b030414000600080000002100e9de0fbfff0000001c020000130000005b436f6e74656e745f54797065735d2e786d6cac91cb4ec3301045f748fc83e52d4a
9cb2400825e982c78ec7a27cc0c8992416c9d8b2a755fbf74cd25442a820166c2cd933f79e3be372bd1f07b5c3989ca74aaff2422b24eb1b475da5df374fd9ad
5689811a183c61a50f98f4babebc2837878049899a52a57be670674cb23d8e90721f90a4d2fa3802cb35762680fd800ecd7551dc18eb899138e3c943d7e503b6
b01d583deee5f99824e290b4ba3f364eac4a430883b3c092d4eca8f946c916422ecab927f52ea42b89a1cd59c254f919b0e85e6535d135a8de20f20b8c12c3b0
0c895fcf6720192de6bf3b9e89ecdbd6596cbcdd8eb28e7c365ecc4ec1ff1460f53fe813d3cc7f5b7f020000ffff0300504b030414000600080000002100a5d6
a7e7c0000000360100000b0000005f72656c732f2e72656c73848fcf6ac3300c87ef85bd83d17d51d2c31825762fa590432fa37d00e1287f68221bdb1bebdb4f
c7060abb0884a4eff7a93dfeae8bf9e194e720169aaa06c3e2433fcb68e1763dbf7f82c985a4a725085b787086a37bdbb55fbc50d1a33ccd311ba548b6309512
0f88d94fbc52ae4264d1c910d24a45db3462247fa791715fd71f989e19e0364cd3f51652d73760ae8fa8c9ffb3c330cc9e4fc17faf2ce545046e37944c69e462
a1a82fe353bd90a865aad41ed0b5b8f9d6fd010000ffff0300504b0304140006000800000021006b799616830000008a0000001c0000007468656d652f746865
6d652f7468656d654d616e616765722e786d6c0ccc4d0ac3201040e17da17790d93763bb284562b2cbaebbf600439c1a41c7a0d29fdbd7e5e38337cedf14d59b
4b0d592c9c070d8a65cd2e88b7f07c2ca71ba8da481cc52c6ce1c715e6e97818c9b48d13df49c873517d23d59085adb5dd20d6b52bd521ef2cdd5eb9246a3d8b
4757e8d3f729e245eb2b260a0238fd010000ffff0300504b03041400060008000000210007b740aaca0600008f1a0000160000007468656d652f7468656d652f
7468656d65312e786d6cec595b8bdb46147e2ff43f08bd3bbe49be2cf1065bb69336bb49889d943cceda636bb2238dd18c776342a0244f7d2914d2d28706fad6
87521a68a0a12ffd310b1bdaf447f4cc489667ec71f6420aa1640d8b34face996fce39face48ba7aed51449d239c70c2e2965bbe52721d1c8fd898c4d3967b6f
d82f345c870b148f1165316eb90bccdd6bbb9f7e7215ed881047d801fb98efa0961b0a31db2916f9088611bfc26638866b13964448c069322d8e13740c7e235a
ac944ab5628448ec3a318ac0ededc9848cb033942edddda5f31e85d358703930a2c940bac68685c28e0fcb12c1173ca089738468cb8579c6ec78881f09d7a188
0bb8d0724beacf2dee5e2da29dcc888a2db69a5d5ffd657699c1f8b0a2e64ca607f9a49ee77bb576ee5f01a8d8c4f5eabd5aaf96fb5300341ac14a532eba4fbf
d3ec74fd0cab81d2438bef6ebd5b2d1b78cd7f758373db973f03af40a97f6f03dfef07104503af4029dedfc07b5ebd1278065e81527c6d035f2fb5bb5eddc02b
5048497cb8812ef9b56ab05c6d0e99307ac30a6ffa5ebf5ec99caf50500d7975c929262c16db6a2d420f59d2078004522448ec88c50c4fd008aa3840941c24c4
d923d3100a6f8662c661b85429f54b55f82f7f9e3a5211413b1869d6921730e11b43928fc34709998996fb39787535c8e9ebd7274f5f9d3cfdfde4d9b393a7bf
66732b5786dd0d144f75bbb73f7df3cf8b2f9dbf7ffbf1edf36fd3a9d7f15cc7bff9e5ab377ffcf92ef7b0e255284ebf7bf9e6d5cbd3efbffeebe7e716efed04
1de8f0218930776ee163e72e8b608116fef820b998c5304444b768c7538e622467b1f8ef89d040df5a208a2cb80e36e3783f01a9b101afcf1f1a8407613217c4
e2f1661819c07dc6688725d628dc947369611ecee3a97df264aee3ee2274649b3b40b191e5de7c061a4b6c2e83101b34ef50140b34c531168ebcc60e31b6acee
0121465cf7c928619c4d84f380381d44ac21199203a39a56463748047959d80842be8dd8ecdf773a8cda56ddc5472612ee0d442de487981a61bc8ee602453697
4314513de07b48843692834532d2713d2e20d3534c99d31b63ce6d36b71358af96f49b2033f6b4efd345642213410e6d3ef710633ab2cb0e831045331b7640e2
50c77ec60fa144917387091b7c9f9977883c873ca0786bbaef136ca4fb6c35b8070aab535a1588bc324f2cb9bc8e9951bf83059d20aca4061a80a1eb1189cf14
f93579f7ff3b7907113dfde1856545ef47d2ed8e8d7c5c50ccdb09b1de4d37d6247c1b6e5db803968cc987afdb5d348fef60b855369bd747d9fe28dbeeff5eb6
b7ddcfef5fac57fa0cd22db7ade9765d6ddea3ad7bf709a174201614ef71b57de7d095c67d189476eab915e7cf72b3100ee59d0c1318b86982948d9330f10511
e1204433d8e3975de964ca33d753eecc1887adbf1ab6fa96783a8ff6d9387d642d97e5e3692a1e1c89d578c9cfc7e17143a4e85a7df51896bb576ca7ea717949
40da5e8484369949a26a21515f0eca20a98773089a85845ad97b61d1b4b06848f7cb546db0006a795660dbe4c066abe5fa1e9880113c55218ac7324f69aa97d9
55c97c9f99de164ca302600fb1ac8055a69b92ebd6e5c9d5a5a5768e4c1b24b4723349a8c8a81ec64334c65975cad1f3d0b868ae9bab941af46428d47c505a2b
1af5c6bb585c36d760b7ae0d34d69582c6ce71cbad557d2899119ab5dc093cfac3613483dae172bb8be814de9f8d4492def097519659c24517f1300db8129d54
0d222270e25012b55cb9fc3c0d34561aa2b8952b20081f2cb926c8ca87460e926e26194f267824f4b46b2332d2e929287caa15d6abcafcf26069c9e690ee4138
3e760ee83cb98ba0c4fc7a5906704c38bc012aa7d11c1378a5990bd9aafed61a5326bbfa3b455543e938a2b310651d4517f314aea43ca7a3cef2186867d99a21
a05a48b2467830950d560faad14df3ae9172d8da75cf369291d34473d5330d55915dd3ae62c60ccb36b016cbcb35798dd532c4a0697a874fa57b5d729b4bad5b
db27e45d02029ec7cfd275cfd110346aabc90c6a92f1a60c4bcdce46cddeb15ce019d4ced32434d5af2dddaec52def11d6e960f0529d1fecd6ab168626cb7da5
8ab4faf6a17f9e60070f413cbaf022784e0557a9848f0f09820dd140ed4952d9805be491c86e0d3872e60969b98f4b7edb0b2a7e502835fc5ec1ab7aa542c36f
570b6ddfaf967b7eb9d4ed549e4063116154f6d3ef2e7d780d4517d9d71735bef105265abe69bb32625191a92f2c45455c7d812957b67f81710888cee35aa5df
ac363bb542b3daee17bc6ea7516806b54ea15b0beadd7e37f01bcdfe13d7395260af5d0dbc5aaf51a89583a0e0d54a927ea359a87b954adbabb71b3daffd24db
c6c0ca53f9c86201e155bc76ff050000ffff0300504b0304140006000800000021000dd1909fb60000001b010000270000007468656d652f7468656d652f5f72
656c732f7468656d654d616e616765722e786d6c2e72656c73848f4d0ac2301484f78277086f6fd3ba109126dd88d0add40384e4350d363f2451eced0dae2c08
2e8761be9969bb979dc9136332de3168aa1a083ae995719ac16db8ec8e4052164e89d93b64b060828e6f37ed1567914b284d262452282e3198720e274a939cd0
8a54f980ae38a38f56e422a3a641c8bbd048f7757da0f19b017cc524bd62107bd5001996509affb3fd381a89672f1f165dfe514173d9850528a2c6cce0239baa
4c04ca5bbabac4df000000ffff0300504b01022d0014000600080000002100e9de0fbfff0000001c0200001300000000000000000000000000000000005b436f
6e74656e745f54797065735d2e786d6c504b01022d0014000600080000002100a5d6a7e7c0000000360100000b00000000000000000000000000300100005f72
656c732f2e72656c73504b01022d00140006000800000021006b799616830000008a0000001c00000000000000000000000000190200007468656d652f746865
6d652f7468656d654d616e616765722e786d6c504b01022d001400060008000000210007b740aaca0600008f1a00001600000000000000000000000000d60200
007468656d652f7468656d652f7468656d65312e786d6c504b01022d00140006000800000021000dd1909fb60000001b01000027000000000000000000000000
00d40900007468656d652f7468656d652f5f72656c732f7468656d654d616e616765722e786d6c2e72656c73504b050600000000050005005d010000cf0a00000000}
{\*\colorschememapping 3c3f786d6c2076657273696f6e3d22312e302220656e636f64696e673d225554462d3822207374616e64616c6f6e653d22796573223f3e0d0a3c613a636c724d
617020786d6c6e733a613d22687474703a2f2f736368656d61732e6f70656e786d6c666f726d6174732e6f72672f64726177696e676d6c2f323030362f6d6169
6e22206267313d226c743122207478313d22646b3122206267323d226c743222207478323d22646b322220616363656e74313d22616363656e74312220616363
656e74323d22616363656e74322220616363656e74333d22616363656e74332220616363656e74343d22616363656e74342220616363656e74353d22616363656e74352220616363656e74363d22616363656e74362220686c696e6b3d22686c696e6b2220666f6c486c696e6b3d22666f6c486c696e6b222f3e}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax371\lsdlockeddef0\lsdsemihiddendef0\lsdunhideuseddef0\lsdqformatdef0\lsdprioritydef99{\lsdlockedexcept \lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority0 \lsdlocked0 Normal;\lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority9 \lsdlocked0 heading 1;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority9 \lsdlocked0 heading 2;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority9 \lsdlocked0 heading 3;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority9 \lsdlocked0 heading 4;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority9 \lsdlocked0 heading 5;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority9 \lsdlocked0 heading 6;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority9 \lsdlocked0 heading 7;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority9 \lsdlocked0 heading 8;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority9 \lsdlocked0 heading 9;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 index 1;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 index 2;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 index 3;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 index 4;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 index 5;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 index 6;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 index 7;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 index 8;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 index 9;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdpriority39 \lsdlocked0 toc 1;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdpriority39 \lsdlocked0 toc 2;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdpriority39 \lsdlocked0 toc 3;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdpriority39 \lsdlocked0 toc 4;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdpriority39 \lsdlocked0 toc 5;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdpriority39 \lsdlocked0 toc 6;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdpriority39 \lsdlocked0 toc 7;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdpriority39 \lsdlocked0 toc 8;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdpriority39 \lsdlocked0 toc 9;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Normal Indent;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 footnote text;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 annotation text;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 header;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 footer;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 index heading;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority35 \lsdlocked0 caption;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 table of figures;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 envelope address;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 envelope return;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 footnote reference;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 annotation reference;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 line number;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 page number;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 endnote reference;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 endnote text;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 table of authorities;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 macro;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 toa heading;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List Bullet;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List Number;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List 2;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List 3;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List 4;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List 5;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List Bullet 2;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List Bullet 3;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List Bullet 4;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List Bullet 5;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List Number 2;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List Number 3;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List Number 4;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List Number 5;\lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority10 \lsdlocked0 Title;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Closing;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Signature;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdpriority1 \lsdlocked0 Default Paragraph Font;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Body Text;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Body Text Indent;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List Continue;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List Continue 2;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List Continue 3;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List Continue 4;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 List Continue 5;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Message Header;\lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority11 \lsdlocked0 Subtitle;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Salutation;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Date;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Body Text First Indent;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Body Text First Indent 2;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Note Heading;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Body Text 2;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Body Text 3;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Body Text Indent 2;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Body Text Indent 3;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Block Text;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Hyperlink;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 FollowedHyperlink;\lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority22 \lsdlocked0 Strong;
\lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority20 \lsdlocked0 Emphasis;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Document Map;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Plain Text;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 E-mail Signature;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 HTML Top of Form;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 HTML Bottom of Form;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Normal (Web);\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 HTML Acronym;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 HTML Address;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 HTML Cite;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 HTML Code;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 HTML Definition;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 HTML Keyboard;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 HTML Preformatted;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 HTML Sample;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 HTML Typewriter;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 HTML Variable;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Normal Table;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 annotation subject;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 No List;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Outline List 1;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Outline List 2;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Outline List 3;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Simple 1;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Simple 2;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Simple 3;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Classic 1;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Classic 2;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Classic 3;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Classic 4;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Colorful 1;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Colorful 2;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Colorful 3;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Columns 1;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Columns 2;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Columns 3;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Columns 4;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Columns 5;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Grid 1;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Grid 2;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Grid 3;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Grid 4;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Grid 5;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Grid 6;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Grid 7;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Grid 8;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table List 1;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table List 2;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table List 3;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table List 4;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table List 5;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table List 6;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table List 7;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table List 8;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table 3D effects 1;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table 3D effects 2;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table 3D effects 3;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Contemporary;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Elegant;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Professional;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Subtle 1;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Subtle 2;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Web 1;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Web 2;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Web 3;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Balloon Text;\lsdpriority39 \lsdlocked0 Table Grid;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdlocked0 Table Theme;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdlocked0 Placeholder Text;
\lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority1 \lsdlocked0 No Spacing;\lsdpriority60 \lsdlocked0 Light Shading;\lsdpriority61 \lsdlocked0 Light List;\lsdpriority62 \lsdlocked0 Light Grid;\lsdpriority63 \lsdlocked0 Medium Shading 1;\lsdpriority64 \lsdlocked0 Medium Shading 2;
\lsdpriority65 \lsdlocked0 Medium List 1;\lsdpriority66 \lsdlocked0 Medium List 2;\lsdpriority67 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 1;\lsdpriority68 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 2;\lsdpriority69 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 3;\lsdpriority70 \lsdlocked0 Dark List;
\lsdpriority71 \lsdlocked0 Colorful Shading;\lsdpriority72 \lsdlocked0 Colorful List;\lsdpriority73 \lsdlocked0 Colorful Grid;\lsdpriority60 \lsdlocked0 Light Shading Accent 1;\lsdpriority61 \lsdlocked0 Light List Accent 1;
\lsdpriority62 \lsdlocked0 Light Grid Accent 1;\lsdpriority63 \lsdlocked0 Medium Shading 1 Accent 1;\lsdpriority64 \lsdlocked0 Medium Shading 2 Accent 1;\lsdpriority65 \lsdlocked0 Medium List 1 Accent 1;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdlocked0 Revision;
\lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority34 \lsdlocked0 List Paragraph;\lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority29 \lsdlocked0 Quote;\lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority30 \lsdlocked0 Intense Quote;\lsdpriority66 \lsdlocked0 Medium List 2 Accent 1;\lsdpriority67 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 1 Accent 1;
\lsdpriority68 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 2 Accent 1;\lsdpriority69 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 3 Accent 1;\lsdpriority70 \lsdlocked0 Dark List Accent 1;\lsdpriority71 \lsdlocked0 Colorful Shading Accent 1;\lsdpriority72 \lsdlocked0 Colorful List Accent 1;
\lsdpriority73 \lsdlocked0 Colorful Grid Accent 1;\lsdpriority60 \lsdlocked0 Light Shading Accent 2;\lsdpriority61 \lsdlocked0 Light List Accent 2;\lsdpriority62 \lsdlocked0 Light Grid Accent 2;\lsdpriority63 \lsdlocked0 Medium Shading 1 Accent 2;
\lsdpriority64 \lsdlocked0 Medium Shading 2 Accent 2;\lsdpriority65 \lsdlocked0 Medium List 1 Accent 2;\lsdpriority66 \lsdlocked0 Medium List 2 Accent 2;\lsdpriority67 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 1 Accent 2;\lsdpriority68 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 2 Accent 2;
\lsdpriority69 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 3 Accent 2;\lsdpriority70 \lsdlocked0 Dark List Accent 2;\lsdpriority71 \lsdlocked0 Colorful Shading Accent 2;\lsdpriority72 \lsdlocked0 Colorful List Accent 2;\lsdpriority73 \lsdlocked0 Colorful Grid Accent 2;
\lsdpriority60 \lsdlocked0 Light Shading Accent 3;\lsdpriority61 \lsdlocked0 Light List Accent 3;\lsdpriority62 \lsdlocked0 Light Grid Accent 3;\lsdpriority63 \lsdlocked0 Medium Shading 1 Accent 3;\lsdpriority64 \lsdlocked0 Medium Shading 2 Accent 3;
\lsdpriority65 \lsdlocked0 Medium List 1 Accent 3;\lsdpriority66 \lsdlocked0 Medium List 2 Accent 3;\lsdpriority67 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 1 Accent 3;\lsdpriority68 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 2 Accent 3;\lsdpriority69 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 3 Accent 3;
\lsdpriority70 \lsdlocked0 Dark List Accent 3;\lsdpriority71 \lsdlocked0 Colorful Shading Accent 3;\lsdpriority72 \lsdlocked0 Colorful List Accent 3;\lsdpriority73 \lsdlocked0 Colorful Grid Accent 3;\lsdpriority60 \lsdlocked0 Light Shading Accent 4;
\lsdpriority61 \lsdlocked0 Light List Accent 4;\lsdpriority62 \lsdlocked0 Light Grid Accent 4;\lsdpriority63 \lsdlocked0 Medium Shading 1 Accent 4;\lsdpriority64 \lsdlocked0 Medium Shading 2 Accent 4;\lsdpriority65 \lsdlocked0 Medium List 1 Accent 4;
\lsdpriority66 \lsdlocked0 Medium List 2 Accent 4;\lsdpriority67 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 1 Accent 4;\lsdpriority68 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 2 Accent 4;\lsdpriority69 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 3 Accent 4;\lsdpriority70 \lsdlocked0 Dark List Accent 4;
\lsdpriority71 \lsdlocked0 Colorful Shading Accent 4;\lsdpriority72 \lsdlocked0 Colorful List Accent 4;\lsdpriority73 \lsdlocked0 Colorful Grid Accent 4;\lsdpriority60 \lsdlocked0 Light Shading Accent 5;\lsdpriority61 \lsdlocked0 Light List Accent 5;
\lsdpriority62 \lsdlocked0 Light Grid Accent 5;\lsdpriority63 \lsdlocked0 Medium Shading 1 Accent 5;\lsdpriority64 \lsdlocked0 Medium Shading 2 Accent 5;\lsdpriority65 \lsdlocked0 Medium List 1 Accent 5;\lsdpriority66 \lsdlocked0 Medium List 2 Accent 5;
\lsdpriority67 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 1 Accent 5;\lsdpriority68 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 2 Accent 5;\lsdpriority69 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 3 Accent 5;\lsdpriority70 \lsdlocked0 Dark List Accent 5;\lsdpriority71 \lsdlocked0 Colorful Shading Accent 5;
\lsdpriority72 \lsdlocked0 Colorful List Accent 5;\lsdpriority73 \lsdlocked0 Colorful Grid Accent 5;\lsdpriority60 \lsdlocked0 Light Shading Accent 6;\lsdpriority61 \lsdlocked0 Light List Accent 6;\lsdpriority62 \lsdlocked0 Light Grid Accent 6;
\lsdpriority63 \lsdlocked0 Medium Shading 1 Accent 6;\lsdpriority64 \lsdlocked0 Medium Shading 2 Accent 6;\lsdpriority65 \lsdlocked0 Medium List 1 Accent 6;\lsdpriority66 \lsdlocked0 Medium List 2 Accent 6;
\lsdpriority67 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 1 Accent 6;\lsdpriority68 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 2 Accent 6;\lsdpriority69 \lsdlocked0 Medium Grid 3 Accent 6;\lsdpriority70 \lsdlocked0 Dark List Accent 6;\lsdpriority71 \lsdlocked0 Colorful Shading Accent 6;
\lsdpriority72 \lsdlocked0 Colorful List Accent 6;\lsdpriority73 \lsdlocked0 Colorful Grid Accent 6;\lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority19 \lsdlocked0 Subtle Emphasis;\lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority21 \lsdlocked0 Intense Emphasis;
\lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority31 \lsdlocked0 Subtle Reference;\lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority32 \lsdlocked0 Intense Reference;\lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority33 \lsdlocked0 Book Title;\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdpriority37 \lsdlocked0 Bibliography;
\lsdsemihidden1 \lsdunhideused1 \lsdqformat1 \lsdpriority39 \lsdlocked0 TOC Heading;\lsdpriority41 \lsdlocked0 Plain Table 1;\lsdpriority42 \lsdlocked0 Plain Table 2;\lsdpriority43 \lsdlocked0 Plain Table 3;\lsdpriority44 \lsdlocked0 Plain Table 4;
\lsdpriority45 \lsdlocked0 Plain Table 5;\lsdpriority40 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table Light;\lsdpriority46 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 1 Light;\lsdpriority47 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 2;\lsdpriority48 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 3;\lsdpriority49 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 4;
\lsdpriority50 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 5 Dark;\lsdpriority51 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 6 Colorful;\lsdpriority52 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 7 Colorful;\lsdpriority46 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 1 Light Accent 1;\lsdpriority47 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 2 Accent 1;
\lsdpriority48 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 3 Accent 1;\lsdpriority49 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 4 Accent 1;\lsdpriority50 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 5 Dark Accent 1;\lsdpriority51 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 6 Colorful Accent 1;
\lsdpriority52 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 7 Colorful Accent 1;\lsdpriority46 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 1 Light Accent 2;\lsdpriority47 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 2 Accent 2;\lsdpriority48 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 3 Accent 2;
\lsdpriority49 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 4 Accent 2;\lsdpriority50 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 5 Dark Accent 2;\lsdpriority51 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 6 Colorful Accent 2;\lsdpriority52 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 7 Colorful Accent 2;
\lsdpriority46 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 1 Light Accent 3;\lsdpriority47 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 2 Accent 3;\lsdpriority48 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 3 Accent 3;\lsdpriority49 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 4 Accent 3;
\lsdpriority50 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 5 Dark Accent 3;\lsdpriority51 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 6 Colorful Accent 3;\lsdpriority52 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 7 Colorful Accent 3;\lsdpriority46 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 1 Light Accent 4;
\lsdpriority47 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 2 Accent 4;\lsdpriority48 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 3 Accent 4;\lsdpriority49 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 4 Accent 4;\lsdpriority50 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 5 Dark Accent 4;
\lsdpriority51 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 6 Colorful Accent 4;\lsdpriority52 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 7 Colorful Accent 4;\lsdpriority46 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 1 Light Accent 5;\lsdpriority47 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 2 Accent 5;
\lsdpriority48 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 3 Accent 5;\lsdpriority49 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 4 Accent 5;\lsdpriority50 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 5 Dark Accent 5;\lsdpriority51 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 6 Colorful Accent 5;
\lsdpriority52 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 7 Colorful Accent 5;\lsdpriority46 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 1 Light Accent 6;\lsdpriority47 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 2 Accent 6;\lsdpriority48 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 3 Accent 6;
\lsdpriority49 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 4 Accent 6;\lsdpriority50 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 5 Dark Accent 6;\lsdpriority51 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 6 Colorful Accent 6;\lsdpriority52 \lsdlocked0 Grid Table 7 Colorful Accent 6;
\lsdpriority46 \lsdlocked0 List Table 1 Light;\lsdpriority47 \lsdlocked0 List Table 2;\lsdpriority48 \lsdlocked0 List Table 3;\lsdpriority49 \lsdlocked0 List Table 4;\lsdpriority50 \lsdlocked0 List Table 5 Dark;
\lsdpriority51 \lsdlocked0 List Table 6 Colorful;\lsdpriority52 \lsdlocked0 List Table 7 Colorful;\lsdpriority46 \lsdlocked0 List Table 1 Light Accent 1;\lsdpriority47 \lsdlocked0 List Table 2 Accent 1;\lsdpriority48 \lsdlocked0 List Table 3 Accent 1;
\lsdpriority49 \lsdlocked0 List Table 4 Accent 1;\lsdpriority50 \lsdlocked0 List Table 5 Dark Accent 1;\lsdpriority51 \lsdlocked0 List Table 6 Colorful Accent 1;\lsdpriority52 \lsdlocked0 List Table 7 Colorful Accent 1;
\lsdpriority46 \lsdlocked0 List Table 1 Light Accent 2;\lsdpriority47 \lsdlocked0 List Table 2 Accent 2;\lsdpriority48 \lsdlocked0 List Table 3 Accent 2;\lsdpriority49 \lsdlocked0 List Table 4 Accent 2;
\lsdpriority50 \lsdlocked0 List Table 5 Dark Accent 2;\lsdpriority51 \lsdlocked0 List Table 6 Colorful Accent 2;\lsdpriority52 \lsdlocked0 List Table 7 Colorful Accent 2;\lsdpriority46 \lsdlocked0 List Table 1 Light Accent 3;
\lsdpriority47 \lsdlocked0 List Table 2 Accent 3;\lsdpriority48 \lsdlocked0 List Table 3 Accent 3;\lsdpriority49 \lsdlocked0 List Table 4 Accent 3;\lsdpriority50 \lsdlocked0 List Table 5 Dark Accent 3;
\lsdpriority51 \lsdlocked0 List Table 6 Colorful Accent 3;\lsdpriority52 \lsdlocked0 List Table 7 Colorful Accent 3;\lsdpriority46 \lsdlocked0 List Table 1 Light Accent 4;\lsdpriority47 \lsdlocked0 List Table 2 Accent 4;
\lsdpriority48 \lsdlocked0 List Table 3 Accent 4;\lsdpriority49 \lsdlocked0 List Table 4 Accent 4;\lsdpriority50 \lsdlocked0 List Table 5 Dark Accent 4;\lsdpriority51 \lsdlocked0 List Table 6 Colorful Accent 4;
\lsdpriority52 \lsdlocked0 List Table 7 Colorful Accent 4;\lsdpriority46 \lsdlocked0 List Table 1 Light Accent 5;\lsdpriority47 \lsdlocked0 List Table 2 Accent 5;\lsdpriority48 \lsdlocked0 List Table 3 Accent 5;
\lsdpriority49 \lsdlocked0 List Table 4 Accent 5;\lsdpriority50 \lsdlocked0 List Table 5 Dark Accent 5;\lsdpriority51 \lsdlocked0 List Table 6 Colorful Accent 5;\lsdpriority52 \lsdlocked0 List Table 7 Colorful Accent 5;
\lsdpriority46 \lsdlocked0 List Table 1 Light Accent 6;\lsdpriority47 \lsdlocked0 List Table 2 Accent 6;\lsdpriority48 \lsdlocked0 List Table 3 Accent 6;\lsdpriority49 \lsdlocked0 List Table 4 Accent 6;
\lsdpriority50 \lsdlocked0 List Table 5 Dark Accent 6;\lsdpriority51 \lsdlocked0 List Table 6 Colorful Accent 6;\lsdpriority52 \lsdlocked0 List Table 7 Colorful Accent 6;}}{\*\datastore 010500000200000018000000
4d73786d6c322e534158584d4c5265616465722e362e3000000000000000000000060000
d0cf11e0a1b11ae1000000000000000000000000000000003e000300feff090006000000000000000000000001000000010000000000000000100000feffffff00000000feffffff0000000000000000ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff
ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff
ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff
ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff
fffffffffffffffffdfffffffeffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff
ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff
ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff
ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff
ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff52006f006f007400200045006e00740072007900000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000016000500ffffffffffffffffffffffff0c6ad98892f1d411a65f0040963251e5000000000000000000000000d0d5
5bef5105d401feffffff00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000ffffffffffffffffffffffff00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000ffffffffffffffffffffffff0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000ffffffffffffffffffffffff000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000105000000000000}}